Sutta Nipāta
Translated by Laurence Khantipalo Mills

Published by SuttaCentral.
First edition: 2015
Sutta 2.4 used by permission of the Pali Text Society.
Sutta 3.2 used by permission of the Buddhist Publication Society.
Creative Commons Zero (CC0 1.0 Universal)
This work is public domain. To the extent possible under law, the author Laurence Khantipalo Mills has waived all copyright and related or neighboring
rights to this translation of the Sutta Nipāta.
suttacentral.net

ISBN: 978-1-329-36020-4

The Sutta Nipāta

A poetic translation by

laurence khantipalo mills

Published by

SuttaCentral

Contents

Preface

vii

Foreword

xi

1 First Chapter
1.1 The Serpent Sutta
1.2 With the Cattle-owner Dhaniya
1.3 The Rhino Horn
1.4 The Farmer Bhāradvaja
1.5 To the Smith Cunda
1.6 Disaster
1.7 Who is the Outcaste?
1.8 Loving-kindness
1.9 Sātāgira and Hemavata the Yakkhas
1.10 With the Yakkha Āḷavaka
1.11 Victory Over Fascination
1.12 The Sage Inwardly Silent

1
1
7
13
22
28
32
37
48
55
63
66
72

2 The Minor Chapter
2.1 The Threefold Gem
2.2 The True Meaning of “Stench”
2.3 Conscience
2.4 The Supreme Good Omens
2.5 To the Yakkha Sūciloma
2.6 Wrong Conduct in the Bhikkhu’s Life

76
76
80
86
89
94
98

2.7 How Brahmins Lived by the Dharma
2.8 Dharma as a Boat
2.9 What is Good Conduct?
2.10 Wake up! Make an Eﬀort!
2.11 Teaching Rāhula
2.12 Vaṅgīsa’s Questions
2.13 Perfection in the Wandering Life
2.14 To Dhammika

101
112
118
120
122
124
127
130

3 The Great Chapter
3.1 The Leaving Home of Gotama
3.2 The Striving of Gotama
3.3 The Well-spoken
3.4 To Sundarika-Bhāradvāja
3.5 To Māgha
3.6 Sabhiya’s Questions
3.7 To Sela
3.8 Dart of Death
3.9 To Vāseṭṭha
3.10 To Kokāliya
3.11 The Sages Asita and Nālaka
3.12 Observation of Dualities

135
135
139
143
146
153
158
167
175
178
201
213
226

4 The Chapter of Eights
4.1 Objects, Desires and Pleasures
4.2 The Body as a Cave
4.3 Corruptions
4.4 Purity
4.5 The Ultimate
4.6 Ageing and Decay
4.7 To Tissametteyya
4.8 Being Overbold
4.9 With Māgandiya

239
239
244
246
248
250
252
257
263
265

vi

sutta nipāta
4.10 Before Breaking-up
4.11 Arguments and Disputes
4.12 Smaller Discourse on Quarrelling
4.13 Greater Discourse on Quarrelling
4.14 The Quick Way
4.15 Assuming Forcefulness
4.16 Sāriputta

271
274
277
280
284
288
292

5 The Way to the Beyond
5.1 The Prologue
5.2 Ajita’s Questions
5.3 Tissamettaya’s Questions
5.4 Puṇṇaka’s Questions
5.5 Mettagū’s Questions
5.6 Dhotaka’s Questions
5.7 Upasīva’s Questions
5.8 Nanda’s Questions
5.9 Hemaka’s Questions
5.10 Todeyya’s Questions
5.11 Kappa’s Question
5.12 Jatukaṇṇi’s Questions
5.13 Bhadrāvudha’s Question
5.14 Udaya’s Questions
5.15 Posāla’s Question
5.16 Mogharāja’s Question
5.17 Piṅgiya’s Question
5.18 In Praise of the Way to the Beyond
5.19 Piṅgiya’s Song of the Way to the Beyond

296
296
309
311
312
314
316
318
320
322
323
324
325
326
327
329
330
331
334
336

Preface
How this translation came about
In writing this introduction, I had thought to write just a little about
how the translation came to be. In doing so, I found myself telling the
recent life history of Laurence Khantipalo Mills. I had not intended to
do so, but the two are inextricably linked.
As a Theravāda monk, Phra Khantipalo traveled widely throughout
Australia teaching and proclaiming the Dhamma in the mid-1970’s and
early 1980’s. Many people became students and many made the trek to
Wat Buddhadhamma, the monastery and lay community he established
with Ayya Khemā. Those interested in these details of Laurence’s life
will ﬁnd material online so there is no need to say more here.
In the mid-1990’s, while still a monk, Phra Khantipalo’s life changed
profoundly as a result of meeting his Dzogchen Master Chogyal Namkhai
Norbu in the USA. Practising the Dzogchen teachings became a catalyst
for disrobing and becoming a non monastic practitioner for Laurence.
He moved to far north Queensland, married and established the Bodhicitta Buddhist Centre.
Jump then to the summer of 2009. Laurence had been invited down
to the Victorian countryside by a student but a bushﬁre nearby had
forced an evacuation to the safety of Melbourne. He found a temporary
home with a fellow Dzogchen practitioner where he resided for a short
time until he left again for far north Queensland.

viii

sutta nipāta

We were aware that Laurence had suﬀered a stroke in 2005 and on
this trip there were clear signs that it had aﬀected his cognition. He still
spoke eloquently of the Dharma, but there were gaps in his talks, when
he lost words, lost the thread, only to pick it up again. He murmured
of taking robes again. The dissolution of his ten year marriage and the
subsequent demise of the Bodhicitta Buddhist Centre, had led him to
consider where he belonged. He became aware of his lack of practical
living skills, fragility and most importantly the isolation from his wider
Sangha friends in NSW and Victoria.
Even though I doubt Laurence had ever thought of Melbourne as
home, he reappeared again early the next year and began the monastic
journey one more time, taking robes as a novice in the Mahāyāna
tradition under Ven. Thich Phuoc Tan—once a student of his, but now
the abbot of Quang Minh temple. He was ordained Ven. Minh An,
meaning Peace with Wisdom, and was supported with much care and
respect. However by this time the eﬀects of his stroke and an associated
vascular dementia were starting to take hold. Laurence was unable to
sustain his practice and unable to remain at Quang Minh.
Things immediately looked a bit grim. A few old students, including
Gary and myself, had been providing some small support. None of us
could envisage Laurence living happily in an aged care facility even if
that was what was being recommended.
Again an old student, now also a Dzogchen practitioner, stepped
forth and oﬀered Laurence a temporary home. Those two weeks of
respite in January 2011 became 20 months of care. It wasn’t an easy
time because Laurence could not be left for any length of time in case
he should wander oﬀ. Various people materialised to ﬁll in gaps and
oﬀer support.
When Laurence did go out, with friends, he carried in his shoulder
bag a small red book. In it were his handwritten notes of a new translation of the Sutta Nipāta started many years before, but still incomplete.
This was obviously precious to him because he carried it everywhere

ix
he went. Gary remembers him saying that he felt the previous translations had failed to capture the subtlety of the Pali language. It was
Laurence’s aim to draw this out in a readable fashion. I didn’t get as
much detail, but over a cup of tea one day Laurence said that what he
aimed to achieve was a poetic translation. I understood this to mean
that his translation would have life and vitality. It would not be just a
dry rendition of an ancient text.
Still the text was unﬁnished. Laurence, although he sat at his desk,
could no longer organise his thoughts. Important though it clearly was
to him, there was no more progress on the Sutta Nipāta. Laurence’s
health deteriorated and, in late 2012 he ﬁnally had to go into an aged
care facility. Things languished at this point, and those around Laurence were simply concerned to establish his well being and comfort
as best they could in the new setting.
Then sometime in 2013, among a collection of books and eﬀects
shipped from Queensland, Gary discovered a typewritten—but incomplete—copy of the text. Eﬀorts to locate who may have typed the
document failed. We did not have a digital copy but Gary conceived
the idea of completing and publishing the Sutta Nipāta in tribute to
Laurence and in appreciation of the importance the project had held
for him. In order to achieve this, two things needed to occur: ﬁrstly, the
text had to be transferred into a digital format so that it could be manipulated, corrected and the missing sections completed. Secondly, there
needed to be a suitably qualiﬁed person who was willing to look at the
text, correct inconsistencies and minor errors of the parts which were
illegible and then, hopefully, to provide a translation of the missing
text. Somehow this came together.
Here are the acknowledgements to those who made it happen: To
Bhante Sujato, who kindly oﬀered to read and complete the text and
who has provided energy and enthusiasm in abundance. Only in looking at what he has done do I realize what a task this has been. To Gary
Dellora, whose vision and dedication drove the process; to Sean Read

x

sutta nipāta

who painstakingly scanned and corrected the text into a format from
which it could be edited; to Dammika Pereira who provided support
and advice; and Michael Wells who assisted with prooﬁng. Nothing
that follows could have been achieved without their eﬀorts and we are
indebted to them for their commitment and generosity of spirit.
Just a closing word on Laurence, whose health continues it’s long
slow decline. In the ﬁnal stage of his life’s journey two things have stood
out. The ﬁrst is that—despite occasional outbursts—he maintains a
remarkable and largely unswerving good humour, seeming to ﬁnd joy
in the simplest of things. The second is his continued devotion to the
Dharma. Even in his current state of what is now advanced dementia ,
the visit by a Sangha member always produces a visible and profound
sense of respect and joy in him. This is always inspiring to observe.
There remain a number of dedicated people who surround Laurence. Some are staﬀ, some are friends. All contribute to his well being.
Whatever merit may accrue from this publication, we oﬀer it to all
beings, but especially to all those who have assisted in his journey over
the last few years. This book could not have arisen with out them.
Michael Wells and Gary Dellora
Melbourne Australia, 2015.

Foreword
In mid-2015 Michael Wells and Gary Dellora contacted Ven Brahmali
and I at Bodhinyana Monastery, with the exciting news that they had
discovered an unpublished and nearly complete translation of the
Sutta Nipāta by Laurence Khantipalo Mills. Laurence was one of the
founding teachers of Buddhism in Australia, and his contributions to
the study and practice of Buddhism are incalculable. In recent years,
sadly, his health has been in serious decline, and he was unable to
ﬁnish the work. While I have never met Laurence, I have lived and
taught for many years in the Sydney region, where his main teaching
activity was also located, and am well aware of the lasting eﬀects of
his legacy.
In honour of this founding father of Australian Buddhism, I agreed
to undertake this project. This also gave me the opportunity to work
with one of my favourite texts, and to develop the ﬁrst freely available
complete translation of this important work of early Buddhism.

On this project
First, a few words on the scope of this project are in order. I was presented with a very much unﬁnished text, which had been lovingly
transcribed by Laurence’s students from photocopied sheets. This consisted of translations of about 85% of the Sutta Nipāta, together with
notes of varying detail on some of the Suttas.

xii

sutta nipāta

It seems that it was Laurence’s plan to create a complete translation.
The verses were not all his own, as he had included a few poems or
isolated verses translated by other authors: Snp 1.2 by Ven Sīlācāra,¹
Verses 57 and 669–684 by E.M. Hare,² and Snp 2.4³ and Snp 3.2⁴ by Ven
Ñāṇamoḷi. He also acknowledges his debt to David Maurice for his
translation of Snp 1.8. In his notes Laurence gave reasons for including
these, also noting that various changes had been made. Snp 3.2 is an
exception to this; presumably Laurence would have acknowledged this
translation in the same way had he ﬁnished his notes. It is not hard to
see why he would have included it: it’s a brilliant translation, and not
easy to better.
Since there was already work by a number of translators, it seemed
that it would be acceptable to ﬁnish the text by making my own translations. My translation style is quite diﬀerent to Laurence’s, but apart
from using some of his renderings for technical terms, I made no attempt to imitate his style. Hopefully the eﬀect is not too jarring; perhaps some justiﬁcation could be sought in the fact that the style of the
Pali verses is also quite disparate.
Here are the portions translated by myself: verses 46, 78, 232, 465,
500, Snp 3.6, much of Snp 3.7 (prose from 7th paragraph on and verses
560–575), 589–597, Snp 3.12, 865, 885–890, 894–5, 897–901, 902–916,
919–921, Snp 5.14, 1040, 1071, 1135–7, 1145–9, 1151–6.
Laurence was clearly aiming for poetic eﬀect in the translation,
and there are many unusual turns of phrase and stylistic quirks. It was
not always clear which of these were deliberate choices, and which
were just the ordinary roughness of an unpolished text. I’ve tried to
retain Laurence’s vivid style, only correcting in a few places where the
translation was in error, unclear, or inconsistent. Signiﬁcant changes
¹ This very old translation is in the Public Domain.
² These few verses are adapted as fair use of copyrighted material.
³ Used by permission of the Pali Text Society.
⁴ For permission to include this text, I gratefully acknowledge Bhikkhu Ñāṇatusita
of the Buddhist Publication Society.

xiii
are indicated in the footnotes. All notes added by me are indicated as
such; if there is no name, the note or comment is Laurence’s.
As for Laurence’s commentaries that follow many individual suttas,
I made no additions. I hope the reader will appreciate the text for
what it is, and not judge too harshly the many unﬁnished sections.
I have gone through and corrected and polished where I thought it
was necessary, but with the exception of correcting a few mistakes, I
haven’t changed the content.
I have adjusted the verse numbering and reference conventions, using the same conventions as used on SuttaCentral.⁵ This will hopefully
make referencing the Pali text easier.
One detail that may be confusing. The Sutta Nipāta in this book is
referenced in two ways: either by chapter and Sutta (eg. Snp 1.1), or by
verse number (Snp 11). If the reference contains a period, look for the
chapter and Sutta, if there is no period, look for the verse number.

Literary character of the Sutta Nipāta
Laurence’s manuscript included no general introduction, so I will say a
few words here. What follows is strictly a general reader’s introduction
to the text, and I will refrain from either interpretation or text-critical
analysis.
The Sutta Nipāta is the ﬁfth book of the Khuddaka Nikāya of the Pali
canon. It is mainly verse, with a few prose sections. The text is, so far
as we know, unique to the Pali tradition. There are no parallels to the
book as a whole in the Tibetan or Chinese canons, nor any references
to it in the northern traditions.
There are, however, many parallels to speciﬁc verses or sections
of the text; among others, the Ratana Sutta, Khaggavisāṇa Sutta, and
Aṭṭhakavagga have important parallels. Several of the texts, such as
the Sela Sutta, are found elsewhere in the Pali canon. And, as always,
⁵ https://suttacentral.net/abbreviations

xiv

sutta nipāta

individual verses are widely shared across the many verse collections
found in all schools of Buddhism.
The Sutta Nipāta has a unique structure, in that it is comprised (almost) entirely of poems, that is, coherent sets of verses. Often Buddhist
verse collections consist of assemblages of individual verses loosely
connected by theme (Dhammapada), or verses associated with a prose
background story (Udāna, Jātaka). Perhaps the closest literary cousin
of the Sutta Nipāta would be the Sagāthā Vagga of the Saṁyutta Nikāya,
which likewise consists of various sets of verses, often in dialogue
form, and with a minimal narrative background. Several of the Sutta
Nipāta texts are in fact shared with the Sagāthā Vagga, such as the
Kasi-Bhāradvāja Sutta (Snp 1.4).
The poems of the Sutta Nipāta are, like all early Buddhist texts,
organized in vaggas, that is, chapters of roughly ten texts; although,
unusually, all the vaggas of Snp consist of more than ten texts. The ﬁrst
three vaggas have only slender thematic connections.
However the ﬁnal two chapters are fairly tightly knit, and evidently
were self-contained collections that were added to the Sutta Nipāta.
They are referred to by name in several places in the prose Suttas, and
the Aṭṭhakavagga has a version in the Chinese canon. These chapters,
together with certain other texts such as the Khaggavisāṇa Sutta, show
certain signs of being old texts, such as archaic vocabulary and metrical
forms. This has led to the often repeated claim that the Sutta Nipāta is
a uniquely early text. It is not. Many of the poems in the Sutta Nipāta
are not especially early, and some of them are quite late, notably the
opening verses of the Nālaka Sutta (Snp 3.11).
Even in the cases of the early verses, there is no compelling reason
to consider them as any earlier than the prose Suttas.⁶ And these sections are themselves comprised of elements of diﬀering periods; the
⁶ To learn more about the literary features of the text, see Bhikkhu Ānandajoti,
Pārāyanavagga: A New Edition together with A Study of its Metre.
http://www.ancient-buddhist-texts.net/Textual-Studies/Parayana-Metre/index.htm

xv
Introduction to the Pārāyana Vagga, for example, is much later than
the questions that follow it.

Themes
Since the collection is primarily organized by literary style rather than
topic, it contains texts on a wide variety of themes. These themes are
familiar elsewhere in Buddhist texts, and I will brieﬂy summarize
them here.
1. The virtues of renunciation and the proper life of the ascetic (eg.
Snp 1.1, Snp 1.3)
2. Ethical virtues and dangers (eg. Snp 1.6, Snp 1.7)
3. Revaluation of contemporary, often Brahmanical, views (eg. Snp
1.4, Snp 2.7)
4. Conversion of native deities (eg. Snp 1.9, Snp 1.10)
5. The virtues of the Buddha and Triple Gem (eg. Snp 2.1, Snp 3.7)
6. Biography (eg. Snp 3.1, Snp 3.2, Snp 3.10, Snp 3.11, Snp 4.15)
7. Meditation and mental development (eg. Snp 1.8, Snp 1.11, Snp
2.10)
8. Philosophy, especially of causation and not-self (eg. Snp 3.12, Snp
4.11)
9. Letting go of disputatious views (eg. Snp 4.3, Snp 4.12, Snp 4.13)
Laurence has commented on many of these themes in his notes
on individual Suttas, and I don’t think this is the place to add more.
Laurence was not afraid to criticize what he felt needed it, and to praise
where it was due. In this he follows the spirit of the Buddha’s teachings,
to engage and inquire, not to blindly submit. He shows how someone
with a lifelong devotion to the Buddha’s heart teachings can illuminate
the Dhamma with a critical intelligence.
I would add a word of caution against over-interpreting the text.
Perhaps the most striking themes, sometimes taken as emblematic of
the collection as a whole, are the ﬁrst and last in the above list: the

xvi

sutta nipāta

virtues of renunciation, and the dangers of disputatious views. If one
assumes that the Snp is a uniquely archaic text, it is tempting to see
these positions as more authentic to the Buddha’s orginal teachings
than what is found in the bulk of the prose texts. I don’t think this
is the case. The virtue of renunciation and a simple wandering life
is mentioned in many places in the prose Suttas, as is the danger of
getting involved in disputations based on theoretical views. Perhaps
they are emphasized more in the Snp, but this is hardly a sign of any
substantially diﬀerent doctrine. It is, in my view, a mistake to develop
a theory of Early Buddhism based on a few verses.
There is no overall thematic development in the text, so the reader
can start wherever they like. The only exception is the ﬁnal chapter,
which is one long Sutta and should be read as a whole.
The Sutta Nipāta is most usefully read as a guide and an inspiration.
The texts are vivid, personal, and direct. There is little of the ﬂowery
adornment that characterized later Buddhist literature. And the verse
form leaves out much of the repetition that can seem so ponderous in
the prose texts. The texts are highly concentrated; a little has a lot of
ﬂavour. In my ﬁrst rains retreat, I read just the Sutta Nipāta, one Sutta
each day, while I memorized most of the Pali text. It was an endless
source of inspiration and wisdom for me, and I hope it can be so for
you as well.
Bhikkhu Sujato
Sydney, June 2015

chapter 1

First Chapter
1.1

The Serpent Sutta
Uraga Sutta
Who removes arisen anger
as herbs a serpent’s venom spread;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₁

Who lust pulls up remainderless
as in water, plants and blooms of lotuses;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₂

Who craving dams remainderless
as drying of a river’s ﬁerce and rapid ﬂow;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₃

Who destroys conceit entire
as a great ﬂood a bridge of reeds so frail;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₄

2

sutta nipāta
Who in rebirths¹ no essence ﬁnds
as a seeker of ﬂowers on Udumbara trees;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₅

Who keeps no grudges inwardly
but this “being-not being” has gone beyond;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₆

In who do thoughts no longer smoulder,
internally curtailed, remainderless;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₇

Who neither goes too far nor lags behind,
all mind-proliferation gone beyond;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₈

Who neither goes too far nor lags behind,
who of the world has Known, “All is not thus”;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₉

Who neither goes too far nor lags behind,
who free of greed has Known, “All is not thus”;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₁₀

Who neither goes too far nor lags behind,
who free of lust has Known, “All is not thus”;
¹ Sujato: lkm had “being”. However the text is bhavesu, which is plural. This is one
reason why “being”, or for that matter “becoming”, are not good choices to translate
bhava.

1.1 the serpent sutta

3

a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₁₁

Who neither goes too far nor lags behind,
who free of hate has Known, “All is not thus”;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₁₂

Who neither goes too far nor lags behind,
who delusion-free has Known, “All is not thus”;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₁₃

In whom are no latent tendencies at all—
whose roots of evil completely are expunged;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₁₄

In whom is no anxiety at all
to cause return to this existence here;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₁₅

In whom no attachment formed at all
to cause return to all existences;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₁₆

Who’s left behind ﬁve hindrances,
serene then, crossed doubt, lacking inner barbs;
a bhikkhu such leaves here and there
as a serpent sloughs its worn-out skin.

₁₇

(Snp 1–17)

4

sutta nipāta

Notes on the Serpent Sutta
A Sutta with many striking points, which perhaps determined the
fact that it comes ﬁrst in this collection. The half-verse refrain notes
that it describes a bhikkhu with various attainments. As the great
commentator Buddhaghosa explains bhikkhu should be taken to mean
“anyone who practises mindfulness”, that is anyone who is devoted to
maintaining mindfulness, the heart of Dharma, in their daily lives.
These practitioners “leave here and there”: they have left attachment to “here”—this life—as well as “there”—any future life. The Pāli
uses the compound word orapāra, which is literally “this shore or bank
and the further shore”.
5: The ﬁfth verse, which compares the one who ﬁnds no essence
(sāra), with the lack of ﬂowers upon ﬁg-trees—udumbara, which
the pts Dictionary informs us is Ficus glomerata—needs a little explanation. None of the 800 species of Ficus or ﬁg seems
to have ﬂowers, though they all have fruits, one of which is the
well-known edible ﬁg. But how could there be fruits without
ﬂowers ﬁrst? The answer to this is that the receptacle, the small
green ﬁgs, contain inside themselves the ﬂowers which are pollinated there by small wasps, the eggs of which have been laid
in there. When pollination has been accomplished the unripe
receptacles swell and eventually soften, releasing a generation
of small wasps which carry this process on. Trying to ﬁnd identiﬁable ﬂowers on udumbara trees is a waste of time, a misleading
venture as apart from the ﬁgs themselves there are no ﬂowers.
No “essential” ﬂowers can be found.
6: The next verse which has the phrase: “this-being-not-being” (itibhavābhavataṁ) includes all kinds of being or existence, even
non-existence. Some people may have craving for non-existence,
holding nihilistic theories, rather than the more common craving
for various sorts of existence which supports the many views of

1.1 the serpent sutta

5

eternalism. God-worshiping religions generally have eternalist
views.
8–13: These verses repeat their opening line, “Who neither goes too far
nor lags behind” meaning one who does not resort to any sort of
extreme. Extremes of views, speech and actions are popular in
the world, now as they were in the Buddha’s time, while the Middle Way transcending all extremes is both hard to practise, and
requires eﬀort and mindfulness. Slipping into extremes is not
hard, for the latent tendencies towards them are already embedded in our confused minds, with their conception of “I am” and “I
want”. “Lags behind”—or in another translation, “hangs back”—
refers to attachment to being, and hence to the wrong views of
eternalism. “Goes too far” or “overreaches” means the opposite:
the extreme of non-being with its views on annihilation. (See the
small Sutta at Itivuttaka 2.22). The second lines of these verses
lists a number of areas in which it is possible to go too far or lag
behind. In verse 8 this is “mind-proliferation”, papañca, which
could not be cured by extreme means. A natural Dharmic cure
of papañca is the Middle Way but most people, from heads of
state round to nameless monks of various kinds, incline to extremes and so create for themselves and others more experience
of saṁsāra, more suﬀering, more conﬂict. “Mind-proliferation”
is not just thinking too much but the indulging in extreme “solutions” based on ego, deﬁled mental states and of entrenched
tendencies.
Verses 9–13 have in their second lines “who of the world has
known, “All is not thus”. This phrase “all is not thus” signiﬁes that
the world as it appears to most people is not as they commonly
regard it. For instance, though change and impermanence are
obvious in everything within the body and outside, yet generally
people do not know and see this. They are blind to what they
themselves are and blind to the world known through the senses.

6

sutta nipāta
Those who are free from greed, lust, hate, delusion—they see the
world as it is , or All is thus. “All” (sabbaṁ/sarvaṁ), is deﬁned by
the Buddha as, eye and sights, ear and sounds, nose and smells,
tongue and tastes, body and touches, mind and thoughts. This
is the All and no other all can be found. (See SN 35.23, the All
Sutta).
14: Speaks of latent tendencies (anusaya) which all unenlightened
persons have. They are like Melbourne’s tram-tracks (or those
of trams elsewhere). A tram must stick to its rails, it cannot
turn left when the tracks go right. Its way is conditioned by the
tracks and in the case of trams there is no possibility of changing
that route unless the rails are re-laid. So we trundle along our
tracks and never take a new way. We see and do what out latent
tendencies permit us to see and do, a great limitation! But there
are no limitations for those whose roots of evil (greed, hatred
and delusion), “completely are expunged”.
Anxiety and fear are part of the ever-turning wheel of birth
and death. Where there is the state of saṁsāra there is fear. It is
hard for us, enmeshed with fear and anxiety, even to imagine
what the state of no-fear can be like. But to experience it we have
to allow ego, the I-am view, to disappear. The same may be said
for “attachment” in the next verse.
17: In the last, the ﬁve hindrances to deep meditation and spiritual
experience have gone—serenity manifests and all doubts are
allayed—for one who has Seen, what doubts could there be?
With no “inner barbs” there is no obstacle to the heart’s opening
of loving-kindness and compassion.

For an excellent and longer commentary upon this Sutta by Ven.
Ñāṇapoṇika Thera, see “The Worn-out Skin”, The Wheel publication
241–242, published by Buddhist Publication Society, Kandy, Sri Lanka.

1.2

With the Cattle-owner Dhaniya
Dhaniya Sutta

dhaniya

Cooked is the evening rice, all milked the kine,
by Mahī’s banks with friends, good cheer is mine,
my house well-thatched, my ﬁre glows bright and still,
₁₈
and so, rain on O sky, if such thy will!

buddha

Hatred and barrenness from me are gone,
by Mahī’s banks I bide this night alone,
my house unroofed, my ﬁres in ashes lie:
so, an it liketh thee, rain on O sky!

₁₉

No stinging gnats are here to tease and fret,
my cattle crop the grasses lush and wet,
and take no hurt though ﬂoods the valley ﬁll:
and so, rain on O sky, if such thy will!

₂₀

The raft is bound and well together cast,
the Further Shore attained, the ﬂood o’erpassed;
of well-made raft what further need have I?
so, an it liketh thee, rain on O sky!

₂₁

Attentive is my wife, no wanton she,
long have I lived with her full happily,
nor ever heard of her a breath of ill:
and so, rain on O sky, if such thy will!

₂₂

My mind attentive is, from passion freed,
long trained in wisdom’s way, well-tamed indeed:
evil in me, what searcher can espy?
so, an it liketh thee, rain on O sky!

₂₃

dhaniya

buddha

dhaniya

buddha

dhaniya

My needs are met by my own body’s hire,
my sturdy boys sit round my own house ﬁre,

8

buddha

dhaniya

buddha

dhaniya

buddha

sutta nipāta
nor do I hear of them one word of ill:
and so, rain on O sky, if such thy will!

₂₄

No hireling I; to servile bonds inclined,
I walk all worlds with what I’ve earned in mind,
of wage or hire no smallest need have I:
so, an it liketh thee, rain on O sky!

₂₅

Cattle have I, yea, cows in milk are mine,
and cows with calf, and tender rising kine,
and lordly bulls whose ways the herds fulﬁl:
and so, rain on O sky, if such thy will!

₂₆

Cattle I’ve none nor cows in milk are mine
nor cows with calf, nor tender rising kine,
nor lordly bulls to lead the herds have I:
so, an it liketh thee, rain on O sky!

₂₇

The stakes all deeply driven, set ﬁrm and sure,
the newly-plaited ropes of grass secure.
No frenzied beast can break by any skill:
and so, rain on O sky, if such thy will!

₂₈

Like bull, bursting the bond of plaited twine,
or elephant breaking free from stinky-vine,
ne’er again I’ll enter in a womb to lie:
so, an it liketh thee, rain on O sky!

₂₉

narrator And now the furious showers came down amain

in pouring ﬂoods that covered hill and plain,
and, listening to the beating of the rain
Dhaniya, faithful, thus found voice again.
dhaniya

Surely our gain is great and to be praised,
whose eyes upon the Radiant One have gazed!

₃₀

1.2 with the cattle-owner dhaniya

māra

buddha

9

O Seeing One, we for refuge go to thee!
O Mighty Sage do Thou our Teacher be!

₃₁

Attentive, lo! We wait my wife and I,
to live the goodly life, the pathway high,
that leads beyond all birth and death to know
and win the ﬁnal end of every woe.

₃₂

He who has boys rejoices in his boys,
he who has kine, of kine are all his joys.
Man’s assets surely are his chiefest treasure,
who has not assets how shall he have pleasure?

₃₃

Whoso has boys, has sorrow of his boys,
whoso has kine, by kine come his annoys.
Man’s assets, these of all his woes are chief.
Who has no assets, nevermore has grief.

₃₄
(Snp 18–34)

Notes on the Dhaniya Sutta
This translation is based on the work of Ven. Sīlācāra, an English
bhikkhu (1871–1950). His translation, slightly amended here, reads well
besides being accurate. I ﬁrst read it in the library of Wat Bovoranives
in Bangkok among the volumes of The Buddhist Review published by
Luzac & Co for the Buddhist Society of Great Britain and Ireland before the ﬁrst World War. Ven. Sīlācāra, at that time the Editor, lived in
Burma. I have enjoyed reading it at various times and places and would
like to honour his memory by including it. To be a bhikkhu at that time
was to brave the disapproval of the prevailing imperial culture. May
this translation of his at least live on!
This Sutta has three characters: Dhaniya, a wealthy owner of cattle who speaks of his domestic and farming concerns; the Buddha,

10

sutta nipāta

whose verses contrast in the ways of Dharma; and Māra, who raises
his head only to speak one verse but a very important one. Beside this
there is one narrative verse to give a picture of the monsoon rains as
background to the dialogue.
There are a few interesting points in these verses which call for
comments. In the ﬁrst verse spoken by the Buddha, his statement
“my house unroofed, my ﬁres in ashes lie”
is striking and memorable. As these words were spoken during the
monsoon when protection from the elements is most necessary, how
could the Buddha say “my house unroofed”? This phrase puts one in
mind of a verse found in the Vinaya (Cullavagga, IX, 1):
Rain soddens when the roof is on
But never when it’s opened upon
Uncover then what is concealed
Lest it be soddened by the rain.
This Vinaya quotation refers to the modern idea of a “cover-up”,
that certain facts about oneself should not be known and how those
who practise this kind of immorality will become sodden and hence
rotten. Buddhas have removed all their concealing coverings for they
have nothing left to conceal. It’s ﬁne that the roof is oﬀ! Similar teachings are contained in the Sanskrit term āvaraṇa, translated by Conze as
“thought-coverings”, though I prefer “obscurations of mind”—the complications and weavings together of all sorts of thoughts: true and false,
puriﬁed and deﬁled, open and concealed. These “coverings” are also related to the famous Buddhist term papañca, multiplicity of thoughts or
conceptual proliferation. Finally in this group of related matters dealing with coverings, there is the image of the Buddha Samantabhadra,
always depicted naked—nothing covered up and sky-blue in colour
symbolizing space. He may or may not be accompanied by his consort,

1.2 with the cattle-owner dhaniya

11

also naked and joined in bliss, the union of wisdom and compassion
with nothing to hide.
The second of the Buddha’s verses contains reference to the famous
raft simile which appears complete at MN 22. The raft made up of
Dharma learned and practised and bound up with actions of body
and speech which lead out of bondage is to be paddled across from
this shore of saṁsāra to the further shore of Nirvāṇa. When that has
been experienced the raft is no longer needed, it should be left on
the Nirvāṇa shore or set adrift there—not carried around any longer.
The Dharma liberates even from its own concepts. It liberates from
all attachments, even from attachment to the Dharma. Of course this
does not mean that one then neglects one’s teachers, or disowns the
Dharma by which one has crossed over. Others will need the raft for
their own journeys, while a natural gratitude for the Dharma manifests
in those who have seen it for themselves. The rendering of MN 22
in the Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha by Bhikkhus Ñāṇamoḷi
and Bodhi unfortunately contains a mistranslation of the important
last sentence of the simile (par. 14), which should read, “When you
know the Dharma to be similar to a raft, you should abandon even the
Dharma, how much more so not-dharma”. The published version is
based upon the Commentaries of Buddhaghosa and is not what the
Pāli text says. “Of well-made raft what further need have I?”—indeed!
“Evil in me, what searcher can espy?” The Pāli plainly rendered
would translate as “evil in me cannot be found”. However, the translation used here reminds us of MN 47, “The Inquirer”, with its question,
“are there found in the Tathāgata, or not, any deﬁled states cognizable
through the eye or through the ear?”
“I walk all the worlds with what I’ve earned in mind.” The venerable’s translation has “I walk the world content with what I ﬁnd”. The
Pāli text has “all worlds (sabbaloke)” while the verb (carati) has the
meaning both of “travel, journey” and of “progress along a spiritual
path”. Buddhas are able to review or investigate all states of existence

12

sutta nipāta

though we usually have access only to the human and animal realms
and even of these know little enough. “In mind” is not found in the Pāli
though the Buddha’s “earnings” are certainly in mind, not of worldly
gains.
The two lines beginning, “Like bull”, have been retranslated. The
“stinky-vine” is some tough and malodorous Liana in the forest. The
third line originally reads, “No more shall I put on mortality” which
is not a great rendering of the Pāli , so I have replaced it with “Ne’er
again I’ll enter in a womb to lie”.
Coming now to the last two verses of the Sutta, the ﬁrst two lines of
each of them have not been revised except to replace “hath” with “has”.
The second pair of lines concern upadhi, a Pāli word conveying the
meaning of “basis” or “support”. Pāli Commentaries have elaborated
the meanings of this word and given it a far greater range. The original
translator used “being” as a rendering of upadhi, but this is too loose.
Ven. Ñāṇamoli has suggested “assets” as a possible translation and this
is ﬁne so long as we remember that “assets” must include what we
think we own in body, in mind as well—My body, My mind—as well
as external possessions.
“Man’s assets, these of all his woes are chief,
who has no assets nevermore has grief.”

1.3

The Rhino Horn: A Teaching for the Hermitminded
Khaggavisāṇa Sutta
Put by the rod for all that lives,
tormenting not a single one;
long not for child, how then for friend?
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₃₅

Attraction comes from meetings with,
and from attraction dukkha’s born;
see danger of attraction then,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₃₆

One full of ruth for friends well-loved
with mind attached,² neglects the good,
seeing this danger in association,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₃₇

Tangled as the crowding bamboo boughs
is fond regard for partner, child:
as the tall tops are tangle-free,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₃₈

The deer untethered roams the woods
going where’er it wants to graze:
seeing its liberty, wise one,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₃₉

’Mong friends one’s asked for this or that,
when resting, standing, going on tour,
seeing the liberty few desire,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₄₀

² Sujato: lkm had “unchanged”, but patibhadda means “attached”, “bound”.

14

sutta nipāta
’Mong friends there’s sexy playfulness,
and love for children’s very great,
while loath to part from those beloved,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₄₁

Resentment none to quarters four,
and well-content with this and that,
enduring dangers undismayed,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₄₂

Some home-forsakers ill consort,
as householders who live at home;
be unconcerned with others’ kids!
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₄₃

Let fall the marks of householder,
as Koviḷāra’s parted leaves;
a hero, having house-ties cut,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₄₄

For practice if one ﬁnds a friend—
prudent, well-behaved, and wise,
mindful, joyful, live as one
all troubles overcoming.

₄₅

But if you do not ﬁnd a friend—
prudent, well-behaved, and wise,
then like a king who leaves his conquered lands,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₄₆

Surely we praise accomplished friends—
choose friends who’re equal, or the best;
not ﬁnding these, live blamelessly,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₄₇

1.3 the rhino horn

15

See golden bangles on an arm,
well-burnished by the goldsmith’s art,
clash together, the two of them,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₄₈

When there’s for me “a second one”
with intimate talk and curses both,
seeing this fear in future time,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₄₉

Sense-things so sweet, so varied,
in diverse forms disturb the mind;
seeing the bane of sense desires
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₅₀

They are a plague, a blain, distress,
disease, a dart and danger too:
seeing this fear in sense-desires
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₅₁

The heat and cold, and hunger, thirst,
wind, sun, mosquitoes’ bites and snakes’;
enduring one and all of these,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn..

₅₂

As elephant bull of noble mien,
full-grown, the ﬂock forsakes and lives
in forests as it pleases him,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₅₃

“Who loves to live in company
e’en timely freedom cannot ﬁnd”;
so Kinsman of the Sun declared—
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₅₄

16

sutta nipāta
View-contortions gone beyond,
right method won, the path attained,
“I Know! No other is my guide!”
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₅₅

No greed, no guile, no thirst, no slur,
and blown away by delusion’s fault;
wantless in all the world’s become,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₅₆

Shun the evil friend who sees
no goal, convinced in crooked ways,
serve not at will the wanton one,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₅₇

Follow that friend who’s deeply-learned,
Dharma-endowed and lucid, great,
knows meaning leading out of doubts,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₅₈

In playful love and sensual joys
ﬁnd no reward—no longer long;
embellish not but speak the truth,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₅₉

Partner, children, parents too,
kin and wealth—things bought with it,
leaving all sense-desires behind,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₆₀

“They are but bonds and brief their joys,
and few their sweets and more their ills.
Hooks in the throat!” This knowing well,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₆₁

1.3 the rhino horn

17

Do snap the fetters, as a net
by river denizen is broke.
As ﬁre to waste comes back no more,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₆₂

With downcast eyes, not loitering,
with guarded sense, warded thoughts,
with mind that festers not nor burns,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₆₃

Discard householder’s ﬁnery,
as shed their leaves the Coral Trees;
go forth in kāsāya robes,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₆₄

Crave not for tastes but free of greed
for alms food walk, omitting none,
and unattached ’mong families,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₆₅

Abandoned mind’s ﬁve hindrances,
set aside deﬁlements all,
aﬀection-blemish having cut,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₆₆

Let go of pain and happiness,
with previous joys and sorrows too,
gained poise and calm and purity,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₆₇

Resolved to win the Ultimate,
not slack in mind, nor slothful ways,
but steady, strong in body and mind,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₆₈

18

sutta nipāta
Seclusion, jhāna—do not cease
but what’s in line with Dharma do,
with mastered existential fears,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₆₉

Alert, aspiring craving’s end,
clear-voiced and learned, mindful too,
striven, true Dharma having known,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₇₀

As lion is unafraid of sounds,
like wind not caught within a net,
as lotus not by water soiled,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₇₁

As lion strong-toothed, the king of beasts,
subdues them all, so overcome
by use of practice-place remote,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₇₂

Frequent the mettā-mind, and ruth
at times, poised mind and joyful too—
unhindered mind by all the world.
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₇₃

Lust, hatred and delusion gone,
all the fetters having snapped,
then at life’s end, one trembles not,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₇₄

They serve and following having aims—
folk cunning, selﬁsh-aimed and foul,
friends seeking nought are scarce today,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

₇₅
(Snp 35–75)

1.3 the rhino horn

19

Notes for the Rhino Horn Sutta
This excellent Sutta is famous throughout Buddhist traditions in various forms and deserves a good metric translation. In general few notes
are needed as its meaning is clear, direct and straight to the point. This
point is repeated in the fourth line of most verses, but will not appeal
to those who do not esteem, even for part of their lives, its eremitic
message. Though there are still monks who prefer the solitary life they
are few compared to those who live in monastic settlements. And some
lay scholars too may ﬁnd shelter from the world’s assaults for their
study and practice and become “single-horned rhinos”. The rhinoceros
is remarkable in India for its single horn as opposed to the twin horns
of cattle, deer and so on. It is not that one should be “single as the
rhinoceros” as some translators have it. In fact the animals are usually
found in groups, but their horns are only one.
I am very much in debt to E.M. Hare’s translation of the Sutta
Nipāta in Woven Cadences and have borrowed many of his good ideas,
though modifying them, and in his honour one whole verse, Snp 57.
This Sutta does not identify the teacher who composed and recited
it. Presumably these were the Buddha’s words! The ﬁrst Sutta in the
book also records no speaker.
The few notes below are preceded by their Snp verse number.
44: Koviḷāra trees are these days called Bauhinia species. Their leaves
are remarkable for their two leaﬂets joined at a single point.
Many species open and close these two as the sun rises and sets.
So their “parting” is demonstrated every day.
49: “A second one”, literally “with a second” is a Pali idiom for a
wife, the use of which here reminds me of “me old trouble (and
strife)”!
50: Both “sense-objects” and “sense-desires” are translations of the
Pāli word kāma. This word is explained in the commentary of the
Kāma Sutta, Snp 4.1 or verses 773–778.

20

sutta nipāta

54: “E’en timely freedom cannot ﬁnd” refers to kāla-vimutti, a freedom found temporarily and usually explained as the experience
of jhāna. This contrasts with a vimutti or freedom beyond time, a
liberation from all bondage. The “Kinsman of the Sun”, Ādiccabandhu, is an epithet of the Buddha.
58: There seems to be, in this verse, a conﬂict between having a
friend who is deeply learned and practised—a teacher in fact,
and the refrain on faring singly. However, if one has the good
fortune to meet and perhaps stay with such a teacher then when
it is time to practise alone, one’s retreat will be much more fruitful. With or without a teacher in our minds, we still have to “fare
singly as the rhino’s horn”.
64: Another tree, the Parichatta, is today known as the Erythrina
indica, the species in general called Coral Trees. Most have spectacular red ﬂowers borne on deciduous branches. They shed
leaves before ﬂowers appear. The leaves are here compared to
the possessions of ordinary people (who are usually attached to
them!), while the magniﬁcent ﬂowers which follow are hinted
at by the words of the third line. Kāsāya robes refers to various
vegetable dyes which will give robes of a yellow (many monks
in Sri Lanka), reddish-brown (as in Burma) or yellowish-brown
colour as used by the forest meditation monks of Thailand. These
earthy colours remind practitioners of their connection with the
earth-element.
69: “What’s in line with Dharma do” tries to translate the frequently
occurring dhammānudhammapatipatti, literally, “practising the
Dharma according to the Dharma” and is opposed to the commonly held path of “practising the Dharma according to oneself ”,
a very diﬀerent kettle of ﬁsh. The Dharma which should be accorded with is the Dharma of what is true without any belief
being necessary.
Examples:

1.3 the rhino horn

21

“All conditioned things are impermanent,
All conditioned things are dukkha,
All dharmas are not-self (and empty).”
These self-evident truths may have to be pointed out ﬁrst
but after deep insight (vipassanā) practice will be known from
a practitioner’s meditative experience. “Practising Dharma” is
the best practice of generosity, moral conduct, loving kindness
and compassion with all beings near and far, human and nonhuman. That becomes “according to the Dharma” with awakening or breakthrough experiences. No views of any kind are held,
grouped, or believed by those who have seen things as they really
are, not even “Buddhist” views.
…“and mastered existential fears” translates also as the fears
of being or becoming. These are experienced indirectly through
reports in newspapers and other media of murder, wars, plagues,
starvation, and all manner of inhumane conduct; or they may
sometimes touch more closely on one’s life. Many fears indeed!
Being or becoming are also illustrated by the famous Indian
painting (now Tibetan) of the Wheel of birth and death, showing the various realms of being and what one may, by making
appropriate karma, experience there.
73: To pack the four Divine Abidings (Brahma-vihāra) into two short
lines is not easy! Mettā, or loving-kindness as it is usually translated, has been left in the Pāli for obvious reasons. Next, karuṇā
or compassion has had to be expressed by the little-used “ruth”.
(Maybe it is a comment on this world that we still employ “ruthless” but have forsaken “ruth”?) The third of these meditative
abidings is joy but particularly the joy with others’ happiness, a
reﬂection for which we have no English word. (Does this mean
we are singularly envious people?) The Pāli word is muditā. Last,
upekkhā or equanimity is squashed into the second line as “those
poised”. Still, being equanimous, it will not mind being so treated.

1.4

The Farmer Bhāradvaja
Kasī -Bhāradvāja Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Radiant One was dwelling among the Magadhans at
South Mountain near the brahmin village of Ekanāḷā. Now at that time
the brahmin Kasī-Bhāradvāja had ﬁve hundred ploughs fastened to
their yokes at the time of “planting”. Then in the morning the Radiant
One dressed and, taking bowl and robe, went to the place where the
brahmin Kasī-Bhāradvāja was working.
As that time the brahmin Kasī-Bhāradvāja’s food distribution was
happening. Then the Radiant One approached the place for the distribution of food and stood to one side. The brahmin Kasī-Bhāradvāja saw
the Radiant One standing for alms and said to him:
“Samaṇa, I plough and plant, and when I have ploughed and planted,
I eat. You too, samaṇa, ought to plough and plant; then when you have
ploughed and planted, you will eat.”
“But I too, brahmin, plough and plant, and when I have ploughed
and planted, I eat.”
“But we do not see Master Gotama’s yoke or plough or ploughshare
or goad or oxen; yet Master Gotama says, “I too brahmin, plough and
plant, and when I have ploughed and planted, I eat.”
Then the brahmin Kasī-Bhāradvāja addressed the Radiant One in
verse:
kasībh.

buddha

A ploughman, so you claim to be
but we see not your ploughmanship.
If you’re a ploughman, answer me,
make clear your ploughmanship!
“With faith as seed and practice,
rain and learning as my yoke and plough;

₇₆

1.4 the farmer bhāradvaja

23

my plough-pole, conscientiousness,
memory, goad and ploughshare both.

₇₇

My body’s guarded, so is my speech,
Restrained is my belly’s food,
The act of Truth is my cutting-oﬀ,
Gentleness is my release.

₇₈

My harnessed ox is energy—
draws safe for yoking’s end,
goes to where no sorrow is
and turns not back again.

₇₉

In this way is my ploughing ploughed
towards the crop of Deathlessness—
who ﬁnishes this ploughing’s work
from all dukkha will be free.

₈₀

Then Kasī-Bhāradvāja had a large bronze bowl ﬁlled with milk-rice
and brought to the Radiant One. “May it please Master Gotama to
eat the milk-rice, Master Gotama is a ploughman, since he does the
ploughing that has the Deathless as its crop.”
buddha

Chanting sacred verses for comestibles³
is not done by me;
for those who rightly See, Brahmin,
it accords not with Dharma.
Chanting sacred verses thus
is rejected by the Buddhas,
such is the Dharma, Brahmin,
such is their practice.

³ Sujato: Food items.

₈₁

24

sutta nipāta
A great seer with Final Knowledge, conﬂicts stilled.
one who has exhausted taints, is wholly free—
make oﬀerings of food and drink to such a one:
the certain ﬁeld for one who merit seeks.

₈₂

When this was said the brahmin Kasī-Bhāradvāja exclaimed to
the Radiant One: “Magniﬁcent, Master Gotama! The Dharma has been
clariﬁed by Master Gotama in many ways, as though he was righting
what had been overturned, revealing what was hidden, showing the
way to one who was lost, or holding a lamp in the dark so that those with
eyes could see forms. I go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dharma
and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus. May Master Gotama remember me as
an upāsaka who from today has gone for Refuge for life.”
(Snp 76–82)

Notes on the Farmer Bhāradvaja Sutta
This famous small Sutta appears twice in the Pāli canon, once here
and again in the Saṁyutta-nikāya, where it has been translated in the
Connected Discourses of the Buddha, SN 7.11). This present translation
varies from that one, necessitating some notes.
First of these concerns the cultivation of rice. Most of my readers
will be aware that unlike other grain crops—wheat, oats, barley, maize,
etc.—which are planted with dry seed straight into the prepared ﬁeld,
rice requires ﬁrst to be planted into a ﬂooded nursery bed and then
when the seedlings are ready, re-planted in small clumps in a ﬂooded
ﬁeld. Water must be maintained at the proper level throughout its
growth, only beginning to dry out with the ripening of the grain.
The prose introduction of this Sutta informs us that the farmerbrahmin, a wealthy landowner able to muster “ﬁve hundred” plough-

1.4 the farmer bhāradvaja

25

men and oxen,⁴ was that time celebrating vappakāla, the time (kāla)
of vappa. But what is meant by vappa? The pts Dictionary, followed
by all translators gives “sowing”, but as we have seen above, rice is
not sown in the way of other grains. If a religious celebration involving many men and oxen with chanting by Brahmins and the oﬀering
of cooked milk-rice is called for, this seems to be the planting of the
seedlings rather than the ploughing of the land. The verb for “ploughing” is kasati, though in the case of rice this is more than the initial
breaking of the soil with ploughs. The mud of the ﬁeld must be smooth
and without lumps, so it is harrowed. This is all kasati—to prepare the
soil. It is followed by vapati, planting or sowing, though the former is
not mentioned in pts Dictionary. In this translation “sowing” is not
mentioned, its place being taken by “planting”.
So at this vappakāla what is going on? Fields had already been
ﬂooded, ploughed, with perhaps harrowing in progress. The backbreaking work of planting—traditionally women’s work, though this
is not mentioned here—would be in progress. The wealthy farmer
dressed in his best and newest white cloth would be issuing orders
and coordinating the whole operation, while also superintending the
rituals ensuring that there would be a good crop. A large amount of
milk-rice had been prepared for the various religious “wanderers” and
also for Brahmins. Part of this would also be set aside for the labourers.
The Buddha’s ﬁrst verse of explanation begins “With faith as seed
… ” The Pāli word which translates as “faith” is saddhā (Skt. śraddhā).
To most people faith means “belief ”, but this is not the Buddhist sense.
Belief involves accepting certain formulations of words as representing the truth. And in this world there are many such “truths” (see
Snp 893–895) underlain by belief, none of them veriﬁable, many of
them at odds with others and hence the basis for many conﬂicts between believers, political or religious, even for persecution, torture
and wars. Throughout the Suttas the Buddha emphasised that attach⁴ “500” in Pāli means “a lot, many”.

26

sutta nipāta

ment to views (even Buddhist ones), departs from the path of Dharma.
One must know through personal experience involving wisdom, not
merely believe. Saddhā, therefore, is a tricky word to translate and
sometimes “faith” must be used. Other possibilities are “conﬁdence”
and “assurance” but neither has quite the range of meaning of saddhā.
Tapo, translated “practice”, means to a brahmin “severe austerities”, or at least a very austere mode of life. Buddhists have softened
the word to mean steady Dharma practice. As the Buddha is teaching a brahmin who would not understand the higher meanings of
pañña/prajña I have not translated it as “wisdom”. But suta-mayāpaññā—the wisdom acquired by listening or learning—one of the
three steps of paññā, is a feature of all Indian religions and well-known
to the brahmin. In the last line of this verse “memory” is a possible
translation of sati/smṛti, another word well-known to brahmins. Also
smṛti, “that which is remembered” is used in Hindu tradition as a name
for the commentarial corpus, as opposed to the holier god-given corpus
of Vedas and Upanishads known as śruti, “that which has been heard”.
My knowledge of horticulture or perhaps agriculture has aided the
translation of the second verse. I have paid little attention to the Pāli
Commentary’s suggestions as these do not make much sense.
The third verse is beautiful and its profound, but straightforward
in meaning and very moving. “Yoking’s End” is liberation.
It is not surprising that the brahmin is greatly impressed by these
four spontaneous verses. He has been convinced that the Buddha is
also a cultivator who ploughs and plants, but that his crop (literally
“fruit”) is the Deathless (amata/amṛta). He wishes then to oﬀer some
special milk-rice to the Buddha in a large copper bowl as a mark of his
respect. But to this invitation the Buddha replies in an unexpected way,
saying that he does not chant sacred verses to gain food—presumably
a thing done by many brahmins. Actually, this would be inconvenient
to present-day monks who, if they kept to the Buddha’s practice, would

1.4 the farmer bhāradvaja

27

lose many a good morning meal.⁵ The meaning of this verse is very
straightforward. This cannot be said of the second verse, which appears
to mean that Awakened persons are ﬁt recipients of food and will be a
“certain ﬁeld for one who merit seeks”—in other words, donors will
make good karma by oﬀerings given to such people. Perhaps this verse
was added later by monks to mitigate the impact of the previous verse.
In any case there is conﬂict between these two verses.
I have chosen the shorter version of this Sutta from the Saṁyuttanikāya. The Snp version adds an incident in which the good brahmin
asks to whom he could oﬀer the rice. The Buddha replies that he knows
not a single person who could receive it and advises the brahmin to put
it in water or in the bush where it can harm no living thing. The brahmin ﬁnds that as it is poured into water it boils, sizzling and hissing
with much steam, so he trembles and his hair stands on end. Finally
the brahmin does not ask for the Refuges and become an upāsaka, but
requests the leaving home with ordination as a bhikkhu. It seems
likely that the Snp version is an expansion of a more ancient and simpler original now found in the Saṁyutta-nikāya. The magical addition
of boiling milk-rice tipped into a stream seems a gloriﬁcation of the
Buddha done by later hands. This decided me not to translate the Snp
version.
Portions of the Commentary’s explanations are translated into
English in the Connected Discourses of the Buddha, see note 446 following
on p. 446. There are rather astonishing remarks in these “explanations”,
for the Pāli commentator has apparently had access to the Buddha’s
thoughts (!) no doubt a very useful trick for ascertaining the truth of
any problematic statement in the Suttas. To preface any “explanation”
with the words “This was his (the Buddha’s) thought” is a claim to know
precisely what an Awakened One was thinking. How could the truth
be found in this way?
⁵ Sujato: It is a common custom in Buddhism for lay devotees to invite monks and/or
nuns for a meal in the morning, at which time they are expected to chant the
traditional verses of paritta.

1.5

To the Smith Cunda
Cunda Sutta

cunda

buddha

cunda

buddha

I ask of the Sage abundantly wise,
Buddha, Lord of Dharma, one who’s craving-free,
Best among men, charioteer beyond compare,
Please do tell me what sorts of samaṇas there are.

₈₃

Asked by you personally I shall explain:
Four are the samaṇas, not a ﬁfth is found—
Won to the Path, of the Path the Indicator,
Who lives upon the Path, as well the Path-polluter.

₈₄

Who do the Buddhas say is winner of the Path?
How will the Path-teacher be incomparable?
Tell about that one who lives upon the Path,
Also the one who is the Path-polluter?

₈₅

Whoso has passed beyond the dart of doubts,
Nirvāṇa-delighted, no greediness at all,
Leader of the world together with the gods,
is Such, the Path-winner, so the Buddhas say.

₈₆

Who knows the Best as what is best indeed,
then teaches Dharma and analyses it,
a sage all doubt severed, one undisturbed,
they call bhikkhu number two, indicator of the Path.

₈₇

Who lives on the Way, the well-taught Dharma Path,
one well-trained and mindful as well,
whatever’s unobstructing, a practitioner of that
they call bhikkhu number three, one who lives the Path. ₈₈
Making a semblance of those with good vows,
deceitful one, worthless and quite unrestrained,

1.5 to the smith cunda

29

Insolent, braggart and family-deﬁler,
who goes in disguise is polluter of the Path.

₈₉

A noble disciple who’s recognised each and every one,
and knowing that among them, all are not alike,
this having seen, that person’s faith does not decrease.
For how with the corrupt
can the uncorrupted be compared?
₉₀
Or those puriﬁed with those who are impure?
(Snp 83–90)

A Few Words
A rather strange little Sutta in which the Buddha answers the questions
of the smith Cunda. He wishes to be clear about what sorts of monks
there are. In the Buddha’s days there were a great variety of monks,
some of who wandered in groups, others who were solitary, some
who had monasteries, others who dwelt in caves or hollow trees. Their
doctrines varied even more and in the Discourses of the Buddha these
are examined as diṭṭhi or views and sometimes revealed as “wrong
views”.
The Buddha on this occasion limits the sorts of monks to his own
samaṇas, further limiting them to four and rather oddly adding “not
a ﬁfth is found”. This of course acknowledges the four sorts of monk,
which the Buddha knows exist among his own Saṅgha. One may assume that what is true of the ﬁrst three kinds of monks—bhikkhus,
plus the fourth who is really not a bhikkhu, may also be found among
the bhikkhunīs. Stories of recalcitrant monks and nuns may be found
in plenty in the Vinaya for both bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs. The four
sorts of monks are brieﬂy described below.
1. Won to the Path. This appears to be a practitioner who has for
the ﬁrst time experienced what is truly the Noble Path (ariyamagga). They are beyond doubt and have lost all greed. Also, lost

30

sutta nipāta
is ownership for though these monks who have won to the Path
they do not own it. In fact, having experienced suchness, the way
all things really are, they can let go of everything.
2. Indicator of the Path is the best of teachers of Dharma—they
teach Dharma out of their deep experience of it. Who knows
the best is truly awakened. He teaches with clarity, as those of
his students know well and is a man who analyses accurately so
that no misunderstanding can occur. They no longer have doubts
about things that to ordinary persons seem either worth no understanding or are taken for granted. They point to matters most
obvious, like impermanence, which in general are not noticed.
3. Who lives on the Way, the well-taught Dharma Path. This
kind of monk is learned and his actions agree with the teachings
in the Suttas as well as those of those famous living Teachers.
So whether from their Teachers or from Suttas the Dharma is
“well taught”. This expression means that at ﬁrst it is derived
from the Buddha and his disciples: all of their uttered words are
derived from the Enlightenment—Bodhi. They had woken up
and spoke the non-basis of Awakening. Their truth is not that of
speculations and “views”.
4. Those who pretend to be bhikkhus but are corrupted. That
this type of monk is included with the other three shows the
honesty of the Buddha. If he had referred to monk number four
as only to be found among the ascetics of other teachers that
would have been a sort of dishonesty, but the Buddha knew quite
well that he had corrupt monks in his Saṅgha. Though it is hard
to believe that corrupt monks could live near to the Buddha’s
presence, because of course he had the power of reading the
minds of others, still some monks were (and are) shameless and
thoroughly corrupt in their dealings. It is not so surprising that
such monks can be found in our days. The Buddha points them
out with these characteristics—

1.5 to the smith cunda

31

a) They “pretend” by copying the ways of those who keep their
precepts,
b) They are “deceitful”, and trying to corrupt others,
c) “Worthless” of receiving the gifts of honest practitioners,
d) “Quite unrestrained” means that they indulge even in the
pleasures usually sanctioned by society,
e) “Insolent and braggarts”, hardly needs any comments,
f) “Family-deﬁlers”, leaves one’s mind to many possibilities.

1.6

Disaster
Parābhava Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Radiant one was dwelling at Jeta’s Grove in the park
of Anāthapiṇḍika near Sāvatthī. Then as the night was ending a deva
of surpassing radiance, illuminating the whole of Jeta’s Grove, went up
to the Radiant One and stood to one side after saluting him. Standing
there that deva addressed the Radiant One with a verse:
deva

buddha

deva

buddha

deva

To ask the lord we come here,
from Gotama we wish to know;
That one who goes disaster way—
what’s the way to disaster’s woes?

₉₁

The wise one does develop well,
the unwise to disaster bound;
the lover of Dharma develops well,
Dharma-hater to disaster’s round.

₉₂

We clearly understand this much,
that way’s ﬁrst to disaster’s woe;
second, may the Lord advise—
what’s the way to disaster’s woe?

₉₃

The untrue, they are dear to me,
true persons, they’re not dear, so
the untrue teaching one prefers—
that’s the way to disaster’s woe.

₉₄

We clearly understand this much,
second that way’s to disaster’s woe;
thirdly, may the Lord advise—
what’s the way to disaster’s woe?

₉₅

1.6 disaster
buddha

deva

buddha

deva

buddha

deva

buddha

33

Lethargic and gregarious—
whoever is of eﬀort low,
lazy and anger marked—
that’s the way to disaster’s woe.

₉₆

We clearly understand this much,
third that way’s to disaster’s woe;
fourthly, may the Lord advise—
what’s the way to disaster’s woe?

₉₇

Though wealth’s enough one does not help,
mother and father who aged grow,
though long their youth is left behind—
that’s the way to disaster’s woe.

₉₈

We clearly understand this much,
that way’s fourth to disaster’s woe;
ﬁfthly, may the Lord advise—
what’s the way to disaster’s woe?

₉₉

Whether with priest or monk as well,
one likes to lie and cheat, also
deceiving other wanderers—
that’s the way to disaster’s woe.

₁₀₀

We clearly understand this much,
that way’s ﬁfth to disaster’s woe;
sixthly, may the Lord advise—
what’s the way to disaster’s woe?

₁₀₁

A person of great property,
with wealth and food they overﬂow,
and yet enjoy its sweets alone—
that’s the way to disaster’s woe.

₁₀₂

34
deva

buddha

deva

buddha

deva

buddha

deva

sutta nipāta
We clearly understand this much,
that way’s sixth to disaster’s woe;
seventh, may the Lord advise—
what’s the way to disaster’s woe?

₁₀₃

Proud of birth and proud of wealth,
so of their families they crow,
but meeting, slight their relatives—
that’s the way to disaster’s woe.

₁₀₄

We clearly understand this much,
seventh that way’s to disaster’s woe;
eighthly, may the Lord advise—
what’s the way to disaster’s woe?

₁₀₅

Debauched in drink, with women too,
by dice debauched; such a fellow,
little by little his assets waste—
that’s the way to disaster’s woe.

₁₀₆

We clearly understand this much,
that way’s eighth to disaster’s woe;
ninthly, may the Lord advise—
what’s the way to disaster’s woe?

₁₀₇

Unsatisﬁed with his own wife,
with others’ wives he’s seen in tow,
corrupted too with prostitutes—
that’s the way to disaster’s woe.

₁₀₈

We clearly understand this much,
that way’s ninth to disaster’s woe;
tenthly, may the Lord advise—
what’s the way to disaster’s woe?

₁₀₉

1.6 disaster
buddha

deva

buddha

deva

buddha

35

A man no longer young still weds
a girl with apple breasts—and lo!
for jealousy he cannot sleep—
that’s the way to disaster’s woe.

₁₁₀

We clearly understand this much,
that way’s tenth to disaster’s woe;
may the Lord eleventh advise—
what’s the way to disaster’s woe?

₁₁₁

Whoever, whether woman or man,
drunken, dissolute, wealth does blow;
then in position of power is placed—
that’s the way to disaster’s woe.

₁₁₂

We clearly understand this much,
eleventh that way’s to disaster’s woe;
twelfthly, may the Lord advise—
what’s the way to disaster’s woe?

₁₁₃

When, from noble family sprung
with little wealth, great craving though,
and still one wants to rule the realm—
that’s the way to disaster’s woe.

₁₁₄

The one who’s wise well knows the way
within this world to disaster’s woe;
and then that Noble, insight pure,
to a blessed state one such does go.

₁₁₅
(Snp 91–115)

Commentary
This translation was ﬁrst published in the newsletter, Bodhi Leaf, of
Wat Buddha Dhamma, Vol. 2, No. 4, 1986. I enjoyed translating it, partly

36

sutta nipāta

because of its rhyme—the Pāli original has no rhyme—and partly the
contents, the truths of which are not conﬁned to the Buddha’s days! The
setting of this Sutta reminds me of the Sagātha-vagga, the Book with
Verses, which is the ﬁrst part of the Saṁyutta-nikāya, the Connected
Discourses. There, as in the present discourses, a deva asks questions
of the Buddha. In this case it is within a stylised framework of the
deva’s acknowledging the Buddha’s replies and asking further advice
on, “what’s the way to disaster’s woe?” This particular repeated line in
Pāli (kim parābhavato mukhaṁ) has a nice swing to it which I sought to
repeat. However, parābhavato mukhaṁ is not easily translated. Mukha
means entrance, mouth, face, while parābhava has the sense of decline
or disaster, so the entrance or way to disaster. The whole Sutta, though
it contains very straightforward advice, is like a game between the
playful deva and the Buddha, who frames his replies in verses which
end “that’s the way to disaster’s woe”. This ﬁts with what we know of
devas, who traditionally are taught the Dharma by singing and acting
it. The “lower” devas of the Sense-realm at any rate, were used to pleasures and could only respond to Dharma teaching through singing it
playfully as in this Sutta. Presumably, since conditions in this world
are inﬁnitely variable, the Buddha could have gone on all day with this
numerical game, but perhaps he thought that the deva had enough
material on the causes of dukkha (not many devas, or even human
beings for that matter, are much interested in this), to be getting along
with. The Sutta closes with the twelfth way to disaster’s woe.
The content of the Sutta—from Dharma and its teachers, through
family and social considerations, to the corruption of politicians—
is wide-ranging, and it would be possible to write a long commentary with stories from the Suttas, Dhammapada Commentary, and the
Jātakas as well as from our own times on these ways to disaster.
The rhyme, which I think adds to its colour and swing, and helps
learning by heart, was possible given the pattern of the Sutta’s verses.
I have not attempted rhyme elsewhere in this translation.

1.7

Who is the Outcaste?
Vasala Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Radiant One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in the Jeta
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. Then in the morning the Radiant One
dressed and, taking bowl and robes, entered Sāvatthī for almsfood. At
that time the sacriﬁcial ﬁre was burning in the house of the brahmin
Aggika-Bhāradvāja and the oﬀering was held aloft. Then the Radiant
One walking in almsround, house by house within Sāvatthī, came to
the house of brahmin Aggika-Bhāradvāja. The brahmin saw the Radiant One coming from a distance and called out this to him: “Stop
there, mere shaveling, stop there, vile ascetic, stop there, foul outcaste!” When this was said, the Radiant One said to the brahmin: “Do
you know, brahmin, what an outcaste is or what things make a person
‘outcaste’?”
“I do not know good Gotama what an outcaste is or what things
make one an outcaste. It would be good for me if the venerable Gotama
were to teach me Dharma, so that I might know an outcaste and what
things make an outcaste.”
“Then listen, brahmin, pay attention and I shall tell you.”
“Yes, venerable sir”, replied the brahmin.
buddha

An angry person, rancorous,
with evils of hypocrisy,
deceitful and of fallen views,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₁₆

Whether once or twice-born then
if one should living beings harm,
compassion for them—none at all,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₁₇

38

sutta nipāta
Who kills in towns and villages,
destruction brings, and then behaves
oppressively—well-known for that,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₁₈

Whoso in forest or in town
steals whatever is not given,
from others to whom it’s valuable,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₁₉

Whoever does a debt contract
but urged to repay, then retorts,
“No debt have I to you indeed”,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₂₀

Who, for a triﬂe that’s desired
from traveller along the road,
kills, that triﬂe to possess,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₂₁

Whoso for self or others’ wealth,
or else for beneﬁt of wealth
when questioned on this, falsehood speaks,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₂₂

Whoso is “seen” with others’ wives,
of relatives and friends, those
consenting mutually or forced,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₂₃

Whoso towards their mum or dad
whose youth is gone and age attained,
though prosperous, supports them not,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₂₄

1.7 who is the outcaste?

39

Whoever strikes, or utters hate
against mother, father, brother too,
sister or a mother-in law,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₂₅

Who, asked for good advice responds
by giving bad advice, and then
giving advice with a hidden agenda,⁶
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₂₆

Whoever evil karma makes
wishing others may not know,
and then conceals these actions bad,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₂₇

Who, gone to another’s house,
enjoys ﬁne hospitality,
then honours not the other back,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₂₈

Whoever, brahmin, samaṇa,
or even indigents who beg,
deceives with false and lying speech,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₂₉

Whoso when mealtime has arrived
abuses brahmins, samaṇas
and then gives not a thing to them,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₃₀

As blanketed, delusion-wrapped,
who predicts untruthful things
desiring even triﬂing gain,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₃₁

⁶ Sujato: lkm had “teaching in obscurities”, which doesn’t quite hit the mark.

40

sutta nipāta
Whoever does exalt themselves
while looking down on others, though
inferior, caused by self-conceit,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₃₂

Provocative and selﬁsh too,
of evil wishes, miserly,
cunning, shameless, no remorse,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₃₃

Whoso the Buddha does revile,
insulting his disciples too
whether left home or laity,
as “outcaste” such a one is known.

₁₃₄

Who, though not an Arahant,
yet pretends to be—is Thief—
in this world with Brahmin gods,
the lowest outcaste of them all,
These indeed are “outcaste” called
as I’ve declared to you.

₁₃₅

One’s not an outcaste caused by “birth”,
not by “birth” a brahmin is;
caused by karma one’s outcaste,
a brahmin is by karma caused.

₁₃₆

Know this is true according to
the example following here:
An outcaste boy well-known to you
as Mātaṅga of the Sopakas.

₁₃₇

Mātaṅga gained the highest fame,
so hard a thing for him to gain;

1.7 who is the outcaste?

41

then warriors, brahmins, others too,
many came to serve him.

₁₃₈

Upon the way to deva-worlds,
set forth along the spotless path
and cleansed of sense-desired,
attained to Brahma’s world, they say;
unhindered he by “birth” at all
he won to Brahma-worlds.

₁₃₉

Though born in Veda-chanting clan,
brahmins with mantras as their kin,
frequently indeed they’re seen
while making evil karmas,

₁₄₀

Even in this world they’re blamed,
the next for them’s a painful bourn;
birth hinders not a painful bourn,
nor from being blamed.

₁₄₁

One’s not an outcaste caused by “birth”,
not by “birth” a brahmin is;
caused by karma one’s outcaste,
a brahmin is by karma caused.

₁₄₂

When this was said, the brahmin Aggika-bhāradvāja exclaimed
to the Radiant One: “Magniﬁcent, Master Gotama! The Dharma has
been clariﬁed by the Master Gotama in many ways, as though he was
righting what was overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing
the way to one who was lost, or holding a lamp in the dark so that
those with eyes can see forms. I go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the
Dharma and to the Saṅgha. May Master Gotama remember me as an
upāsaka who from today has Gone for Refuge for life.”
(Snp 116–142)

42

sutta nipāta

Commentary
“Vasala”, the name of this Sutta, is one of the many words in Pāli and Sanskrit for “outcastes”, those people which tradition, and in the past, highcaste laws, declared to be beneath the four basic castes or vaṇṇa/varna.
These four, brāhmaṇa (priests with cattle), khattiya/kṣatriya (warrior
nobility, kings), vessa/ vaiṣya (merchants, traders) and sudda/ śūdra
(workers) are proclaimed by Hindu Law books to be a God-given ordering of society. Outcastes of various sorts were considered below
even the śūdras.
As to the state of these outcastes, a passage from my earlier book
“Noble Friendship” (p. 39), outlines some of the terrible disabilities:
Many barbarous rules made by the higher castes featured in a Dalit’s (outcaste’s) life. They could not even pass
in front of Hindu temples, much less enter them; they had
to wear cast-oﬀ rags, never good clothes; they had the duty
of clearing away dead animals as well as removing human
excrement; in some places they were forced to wear clay
pots round their necks so that their spittle would not reach
the ground, while their footsteps were obliterated by a
broom tied to their waists; their women folk were compelled to wear non-precious jewellery of iron or pottery;
their children had to be given “ugly” names, and ﬁnally
they could not venture outdoors when the shadows were
long lest their shadow fall on a high-caste person and pollute him. This fear of ritual pollution, very characteristic
of Caste Hindus, underlies all these suppressive rules. It is
easy to understand that people who have been so treated
for hundreds of years, with no chance for education or selfimprovement, would feel that their lives were a hopeless
round of degradation. Brahmins emphasized that they had
been born into such “low” births because of their sins—in

1.7 who is the outcaste?

43

other words, they were to be humble menials, do the dirty
work, and say nothing. Some groups of outcastes were so
polluting to the eyes of Hindus that they were not only
untouchable but “unseeable” as well. There was bitter saying among the outcaste groups deriding caste hypocrisy
that goes as follows: male Untouchables are always untouchables but female Untouchables, untouchable by day,
became touchable by night. Perhaps the most suppressive
rule of them all forbade low-caste people and Untouchables to have any religious education or practice. Religion,
largely controlled by the Brahmins, involved the learning
of Sanskrit, and as this reckoned to be the “root-language”
spoken by the Hindu gods, it was utterly forbidden for
outcastes to even to hear it, let alone learn it.
Even worse was the penalty prescribed for outcastes who heard
brahmins chanting in Sanskrit: molten lead was to be poured into their
ears. Whatever religion outcastes had was their own mixture of ritual,
their own mantras (presumably not in Sanskrit) administered by their
own priests who will rarely have been literate: a sort of low-grade
Hinduism.
Whereas in Hinduism there is a widespread dread of ritual pollution caused by exterior factors such as low-caste persons as mentioned
above, also by restrictive brahminical injunctions, such as the rule
that those of high caste will lose their “purity” by crossing the ocean,
the Buddha’s teaching on purity emphasize that this depends on the
karmas made by body, speech and mind, and ultimately by mind. So in
this Sutta we see the Buddha listing all the actions which make one an
“outcaste”, all them amoral, harmful to others and generally censured
by the world. Thus, one may have high-caste brahmins who by the
Buddha’s standards are “outcaste”, as well as those born as “outcastes”
who in fact are people of great nobility of character, such as Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar. The Buddha did occasionally say that such people were

44

sutta nipāta

brāhmaṇa or “Brahmins”, meaning Awake or Enlightened. (See the
verses in the Vāseṭṭha Sutta, Snp 3.9, verses 600–662). Mere words of
praise and blame have no ultimate truth. Words must be accompanied
by compassionate actions.
The introductory prose section shows the Buddha going on almsround with his bowl “house by house”, that is, he stopped brieﬂy
before each door to see if anyone wished to give alms of cooked food.
This practice shows clearly that he had none of the Hindu prejudice
that cooked by low-caste persons would be “polluted” and its consumption the cause of high-caste, such as brahmins, losing their status. The
well-known brahmin Aggikā-bhāradvāja, as he later addressed the
Buddha as Gotama, knew who he was and that he came from a highcaste warrior-noble family. At that time this brahmin was engaged in
a ﬁre-sacriﬁce ritual (notice the aggika, “of ﬁre”, in his name) and had
lifted the portion to be placed in the sacred ﬁre when he saw the Buddha approaching. The latter was abused by the brahmin who feared
that the beneﬁts of the sacriﬁce would be lost due to the presence of
a man who accepted food from low-caste and outcaste people. “Mere
shaveling” (muṇḍaka) was abusive as brahmins kept some or all of
their hair and looked down upon those, like Buddhist monks and nuns,
who shaved it oﬀ. (Whether the Buddha shaved his head is rather a
disputed matter as attested by all the images of the Buddha showing
him with hair). “Vile ascetic” (samaṇaka) showed brahmin disapproval
of those who left home and had a wandering religious life. Some of
these will have been low-caste people as there were in the Buddha’s
Saṅgha. Lastly, vasalaka as a word of abuse emphasizing low-casteness,
means literally “little man”, hence an insigniﬁcant person. When the
Buddha in reply asks him whether he knows who is an outcaste or
what are the qualities which make a person so, the brahmin, rather
surprisingly, says that he does not. Moreover, he addresses the Buddha
quite politely as “venerable Gotama” though this is a familiar speech
as to an equal. What could have brought about this sudden change in

1.7 who is the outcaste?

45

attitude?
We should leave aside the possibility that the Buddha used one of
his powers or abilities to inﬂuence the brahmin. He preferred not to
employ these unless there was a situation in which ordinary means
would not serve. See for instance his remarks in Dīgha-nikāya 11, Kevaddha Sutta. As it seems unlikely that this brahmin’s attitude was
changed by super-natural means we have to fall back upon what could
be generally described as “the Buddha’s presence”. This is well illustrated by what happened as the Buddha approached the ﬁve monks
who were to be his ﬁrst disciples soon after his Awakening. Though
they had made a pact with each other that they would no longer treat
him as a Teacher (because he had given up starvation and was again
eating), as he approached, they all rose and performed the duties of
pupils towards teachers. We may assume that the Buddha’s presence,
regardless of the brahmin’s prejudices about food, turned his mind to
civility. The Buddha was praised for his handsome features, radiant
complexion and height (see verses 554–559 in Sela Sutta, Snp 3.7).
Towards the end of this Sutta occurs the famous verse, twice repeated:
One’s not an outcaste caused by “birth”,
not by “birth” a brahmin is;
caused by karma one’s outcaste,
a brahmin is by karma caused.
Brahmins in the Buddha’s days and some maybe even now, were
wont to say that they were pure back through seven generations in
both the mother’s and the father’s family. All of these people, they were
claiming, had married only into other brahmin families and hence they
were “pure”. The Buddha by no means agreed with this estimation of
purity and has, in the Suttas, made fun of brahmin arrogance. To know
one’s ancestors back through seven generations on both mother’s and
father’s sides is quite unusual even now, unless one comes from an

46

sutta nipāta

aristocratic family, so brahminical claims for so-called purity ring
rather hollow. This claim of superiority through birth is not conﬁned
to brahmins in the Buddha’s time, as we can attain from the radio and
television news of notions of superiority and the conﬂicts arising from
it in our own time.
It is related to the claim to be an ariya—those who are noble by
race. The Buddha again does accept such claims, the likes of which have
lasted in our time, notably in the causes of WWII and the slaughter of
millions of people. One is noble by practising the Noble Eightfold Path,
one is ennobled by Dharma, not by lineage or race.
The Sutta concludes with one of the stylised passages which are
characteristic of orally-transmitted works. Presumably the brahmin
of this Sutta was impressed and praised the Buddha’s teaching. There is
no reason to suppose that he spoke exactly the words exactly translated
here which appear hundreds of time at the end of Suttas. Whether he
went to for refuge in the formula quoted here, or indeed, whether he
went in any sense for refuge at all is something that we shall never
know.
Three points in the Sutta may be remarked upon: one a minor matter and the others weightier. Verse 118 mentions the term “twice born”.
This means a man from high castes who has not only been born in the
normal way, but has also received a “second birth” in the ceremony of
being invested with a sacred thread, usually at puberty. Brahmins, for
instance are “twice born”. The rest of us remain “once born” and so
of lower status. Workers and outcastes (and those not touched by the
Indian caste-system) are merely “once born”.
Of greater importance in the next verse which declares very straightforwardly (for the ears of heads of state or generals) that if they behave,
as they have commonly done in history, by invasion of other lands and
slaughter, they should be known as outcastes. One or two notable
examples will make clear this Buddhist attitude to war. We have an
Alexander who is even honoured with the epithet “Great”. By the stan-

1.7 who is the outcaste?

47

dards of verse 119, he should be known as “Alexander the Outcaste”.
As for modern times, one may choose from a long list which will no
doubt include Napoleon, Hitler, Mussolini, Stalin and Mao Zedong—
outcastes all.
Also in verse 127 there is the line “teaching in obscurities”, a phrase
covering a multitude of errors. It may mean teaching which will confuse others while promoting the so-called teacher’s ego, implying he
or she has Dharma attainments which do not exist. Or this may mean
teaching an obscure and useless subject from the viewpoint of Dharma.
As an example there is the brahmin “science” of marks or characteristics to be found on animals or people. Such “marks”, such as a mole
on the cheek, are claimed to be characteristic of those who cheat and
lie. Such “science” (vijjā/vidyā) is not based on any cause and eﬀect
considerations.
Connected to this in modern times, there is a small Pāli treatise in
verse, on the marking upon cats, a playful and unusual subject, written
by a Saṅgharāja of what was then Siam and now Thailand! Elephants
have also been the subject of such a “science” of markings and their
meanings. These matters are not exactly essential Dharma, and may
well be regarded as obscurities.

1.8

Loving-kindness
Mettā Sutta
What should be done by one
who is skilled in wholesomeness,
to gain the State of Peacefulness is this:
One should be able, upright, straight and not proud,
easy to speak to, mild and well content,

₁₄₃

easily satisﬁed and not caught up
in too much bustle, and frugal in one’s ways,
with senses calmed, intelligent, not bold,
not being covetous when with other folk,

₁₄₄

not even doing little things that other wise ones blame.
(And this the thought that one should always hold):
“May beings all live happily and safe,
₁₄₅
and may their hearts rejoice within themselves.
Whatever there may be with breath of life,
whether they be frail or very strong,
without exception, be they long or short,
or middle-sized, or be big or small,

₁₄₆

or dense, or visible or invisible,
or whether they dwell far or they dwell near,
those that are here, those seeking to exist—
may beings all rejoice with themselves.”

₁₄₇

Let no one bring about another’s ruin
and not despise in any way or place;
let them not wish each other any ill
from provocation or from enmity.

₁₄₈

1.8 loving-kindness

49

Just as a mother at the risk of life
loves and protects her child, her only child,
so one should cultivate this bondless love
to all that live in the whole universe—

₁₄₉

extending from a consciousness sublime
upwards and downwards and across the world,
untroubled, free from hate and enmity.

₁₅₀

And while one stands and while one sits
or when one lies down still free from drowsiness,
one should be intent on this mindfulness—
this is divine abiding here they say.

₁₅₁

But when one lives quite free from any view,
is virtuous, with perfect insight won,
and greed for selﬁsh desires let go,
one surely comes no more to be reborn.

₁₅₂

(Snp 143–152)

Commentary
The State of Peacefulness appears at the opening of this Sutta and is
implied in the last verse. Elsewhere it is called Nirvāṇa, liberation and
so on. In between the ﬁrst and last verses a number of conditions are
mentioned for attainment of the Peaceful State. There is no trace in this
Sutta of a “method” for attainment of this goal, such as the Pāli commentary presents and which is also explained in the Visuddhimagga,
“The Path of Perfection”, a fact that we shall return to later.
In the Sutta’s ﬁrst line there is a clear indication of what is needed
for experience of the Peaceful State: skill in wholesomeness, in other
words, good conduct with body, speech and mind. This is followed by
ﬁfteen requirements—things that one should work on and make eﬀort

50

sutta nipāta

with—but as they are straightforward little needs to written about
them, though the following remarks may be useful. “Able” refers to a
person who can do and is willing to try. “Upright” and “straight” refer,
we are told, respectively to the moral behaviour with body and speech,
and the same with mind. However, they may also be taken as emphasising the importance of general honesty. With mention of “well content,
easily satisﬁed and frugal in one’s ways” we come to factors more easily
practised by monks, or while on retreat. These three go against the
current of worldliness and materialism. The ministers in charge of economic development in various countries would not be happy if their
populations began to practice them! Not being “bold” means foolishly
over-estimating one’s capacity and taking big steps which one cannot
follow, based on pride and delusion. Not wanting what others have is
good for peace of mind, so not being covetous when visiting others’
houses is very helpful. Wise ones, like spiritual teachers, have developed their minds and are aware of the consequences of doing “little
things”. Their “blame” is expressed to their unwise students often in
private. This does not refer to wholesale condemnations.
The line in brackets is not part of the text but is needed to link
the ﬁfteen requirements with the next part upon the various kinds of
beings to which mettā should be extended. They are deﬁned by having
“breath of life”, though this does not mean only those having lungs or
gills as the Pāli word pāna (prāna in Sanskrit) means not only breathing but also living. Examples of creatures ﬁtting the following list of
adjectives can easily be thought of, until we come to “dense or visible or
invisible”. This could be rendered “those which are substantial, those
that can be seen and those that cannot”. In the context of Dharma the
last means, “those that the human eye cannot see.” Rationalists might
want this to mean “those that require a microscope”, and though this
would be a possible it is not in accordance with tradition. This deﬁnitely means “those with bodies too reﬁned for the human eye to see”,
devas for instance or ghosts. Awareness of such beings increases with

1.8 loving-kindness

51

depth of meditation practice. “Dwelling far or near” may be taken to
mean “those beings whose bodies (or non-bodies in the case of the
formless-realm devas) are remote from our experience”, while “near”
signiﬁes those whose existence overlaps our own experience (as with
animals), or are “near” to us because of former relationships, as with
some ghosts and devas which may act as guides or protectors.
Next comes an interesting line: “those that are here, those seeking
to exist”. Strict Theravāda philosophy upon life after death departs
from the main line of Indian Buddhist teaching. The Theravāda Abhidhamma analyses all experience into momentary dharmas, a doctrine
which rationalizes the teaching of not-self and defends the notion that
no being (which contradicts the idea of not-self) goes from life to life.
The trouble is that often no distinction is drawn between the two kinds
of truth: conditional and ultimate. Rebirth belongs to the realm of
conditional truth within which we usually live. To say that “so-and-so
has gone to heaven” may be quite correct according to conditional and
dualistic truth. The phrase may seem to imply that this person will
be the same there as he or she was here except that they have a new
and less visible body. This view would be on the side of eternalism, one
of two extremes which the Buddhist Dharma-in-the-Middle avoids.
Moreover, such a view ignores the ﬁrst of the three characteristics
(lakkhaṇa) of all conditioned things: impermanence. So a phrase like
“Go to Hell!”, despite showing little loving-kindness and a good deal of
hate, is true within its dualistic limitations: someone goes to Hell.
Ultimate truth in its Abhidhamma form says that there are no
beings, only moments of experience, so no one goes from one life to
another. This theory denies that there is anyone who goes and comes,
perilously near to the other extreme of nihilism. It has led Theravāda
scholars to deny that there is any experience between lives.
The concept of the “between-life” or antarabhava, usually known
these days by the convenient Tibetan translation, Bardo, is a agglomeration of common sense, esp, memory of past lives and vision of

52

sutta nipāta

famous living teachers. The common sense (or conditional truth) is
that so-and-so died and because this person made karma of some kind,
will be reborn accordingly. The extra-sensory perception will be the
visions and sensations of that being who has died by those who were
close to him or her, that suggest that the deceased is still in some way
present. Memory of past lives and the periods that link them may be
experienced by some people, a recollection which comes with clarity
of mind, quite diﬀerent from the confusions of desire and imagination.
The visions of living Teachers may explore the processes of being
reborn during the intermediate state and give disciples instructions
upon how to practise, even achieve liberation in that state. Teachings
on the Bardo are mostly about the latter. Though it is useful to have
books explaining perception after human death, the transmission of
that practice from living teacher is really required. So “those that
are here” are all the beings that we can be aware of in our present
life. “Those seeking to exist” are those in the Bardo seeking existence
through the limitations of their karmas.
Buddhaghosa, the Pāli commentator who lived about a thousand
years after the Buddha, strenuously denies this obvious truth and
makes implausible suggestions as to the meaning of this line (see Minor
Readings and Illustrator, pp. 286–7). This is not the only case where the
classical commentators try to defend an “orthodox” Theravāda position
and so distort the straightforward meaning of the Pāli texts. The words
of Pāli commentators should be carefully examined.
Why does a verse upon anger/hatred/resentment follow next? The
Sutta has already emphasized that mettā should be extended to all
kinds of beings, classiﬁed in less poetic terms elsewhere as “the footless, two-footed, four-footed and many-footed; those with perception,
those with no perception, and those with neither perception nor nonperception” (AN 4.34). But for eﬀective practice these must not remain
abstract categories towards which one plays at extending mettā. Particular beings, especially “diﬃcult” humans or animals which evoke

1.8 loving-kindness

53

fear, must be involved. Real mettā then arises naturally through understanding one’s fears. This verse is here so that the practitioner does not
fool him or herself: “Now my practice of limitless love, unconditional
love, ﬂows to all beings!” Better look at how one feels with those one
fears or does not like! In mettā-practice beings come ﬁrst, directions
and direction-less practice follow. This order prevents self-deception.
There follows the famous simile of a mother’s love for her child
and how one’s mind becoming limitless with mettā should resemble
this. For most of us, loving all beings in that way is not going to be easy.
“Boundless love” becomes possible through the experience of jhāna and
while a few people will have spontaneous experience of this relaxed
but concentrated state of meditation, most require to be diligent with
regular meditation practice. Jhāna has no good English translation
and for that reason is left untranslated. Meditation, concentration or
contemplation are all Latin-based words which do not have the clear
meaning of the Pāli word jhāna. This word does not occur in the Sutta
but is implied by such expressions as “boundless”, “consciousness sublime”, “upwards and downwards and across the world”. Other religious
traditions outside the Buddha’s teaching have also what is known as
“saints” and mystics who experience jhāna.
The last but one verse indicates the practice of mindfulness, how
one should not drift and attach to rapture of jhāna but rather cultivate
a mental state near to wisdom (paññā/prajna). This union of calm and
clarity characterises the four Divine Abidings, which are frequently
referred to in the Suttas. The words “they say” refer in general to wise
meditative persons, not specially to Buddhist teachers.
The last verse however restricts these people to those who are
“quite free from any view” that is, they are free from mere or blind
belief which cannot be veriﬁed by practice with an unclouded mind.
They are free even from the Buddhist assumptions which everyone
will have when they start regular and sustained meditation practice.
Such people are not keen to label themselves “Theravāda”, “Vipassanā”,

54

sutta nipāta

“Mahāyāna”, “Vajrayāna”, “Zen” for these are the playthings of those
who do not Know. The truly liberated are not imprisoned by such limitations though they may use such words in the instruction of others.
The verse reminds us that to ﬁnd this liberation we need to act in a
way that neither harms others or ourselves—“virtuous” (sīlavā), have
access to insight-wisdom (dassana), and have more moderate sensedesires and let them go, the famous or infamous kāma which limits the
mind’s freedom, so that we arrive at the state of not being ever again
being driven into birth.
No methods of meditation are oﬀered in the Pāli Suttas. For these, in
ancient times and still in present, one consulted one’s teacher. Teachers
in the Buddha’s time would have had direct Knowledge of the Dharma
and so needed to learn no methods. Teachers in later times, if they have
no direct knowledge would consult the Path of Puriﬁcation, the compendium of Theravāda Buddhist knowledge complied by Buddhaghosa.
This is still highly revered, both teacher and book, in Theravāda lands.
Some more recent teachers out of their own experience have taught
methods that diﬀer somewhat from this tradition.
If one wishes to consult the traditional Pāli sources explaining this
Sutta, they are available in the translation of the Paramatthajotikā,
The Illustrator of Ultimate Meaning, by translator Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli,
published by the Pāli Text Society.
The present translation is based, though with many corrections,
upon that of David Maurice, in the long out-of-print anthology, “The
Lion’s Roar”.

1.9

The Buddha teaches Sātāgira and Hemavata the
Yakkhas
Hemavata Sutta

sātāgira

Today’s the lunar ﬁfteenth day—
uposatha—a night divine arrived;
Let’s go to the Teacher Gotama,
him of high repute.

₁₅₃

hemavata Is the mind of such a one

sātāgira

towards all beings well-disposed?
Within his power are his thoughts
towards the wished, the unwished too?

₁₅₄

Yes, the mind of such a one
towards all beings well-disposed.
Within his power are his thoughts
towards the wished and unwished too.

₁₅₅

hemavata Is he the one who does not steal?

sātāgira

To beings he’s restrained?
Is he far from indolence?
Does jhāna he neglect?

₁₅₆

He is one who does not steal,
to beings he’s restained.
Buddha’s far from indolence;
jhāna he never neglects.

₁₅₇

hemavata Is he not one who falsely speaks?

Does he use harsh or violent words
or employ slanderous ones?
Or a user of meaningless speech?

₁₅₈

56
sātāgira

sutta nipāta
He’s not one who falsely speaks,
nor uses harsh or violent words;
nor utters words of slander,
but wisdom speaks which beneﬁts.

₁₅₉

hemavata Does he not desire, indulge,

sātāgira

In mind he’s unattached?
Has delusion overcome?
’Mong Dharmas has he Eyes?

₁₆₀

He does not desire, indulge,
for his mind is unattached.
Delusions all he’s overcome—
’Mong Dharmas, Buddha’s Eyed.

₁₆₁

hemavata Has true knowledge he attained?

sātāgira

Is his conduct perfect, pure?
Are his inﬂows now extinct?
Is he not again to be?

₁₆₂

Indeed true knowledge he’s attained
and his conduct’s perfect, pure,
for him all inﬂows are extinct,
so he’ll not again become.

₁₆₃

Accomplished is the Sage’s mind,
his actions and his ways of speech,
of true Knowledge and conduct he’s possessed—
rightly he is praised.

₁₆₄

Accomplished is the Sage’s mind,
his actions and his ways of speech,
of true Knowledge and conduct he’s possessed—
rightly you rejoice.

₁₆₅

1.9 sātāgira and hemavata the yakkhas

57

Accomplished is the Sage’s mind,
his actions and his ways of speech,
of true Knowledge and conduct he’s possessed—
it’s good that we see Gotama.

₁₆₆

Who limbed like antelope and lean,
wise, with no greed and having little food,
Sage in the woods who meditates alone—
let us go see Gotama.

₁₆₇

The Great One like a lion who lives alone,
among all pleasures he’s expectation-free,
let us draw near that we may ask of him
how to escape from the snarefulness of death.

₁₆₈

O proclaimer of the Dharma, expounding it too,
one who’s beyond all dharmas’ Further Shore,
all fear and hatred you’ve utterly overcome
both of us then of Gotama inquire—

₁₆₉

hemavata What co-arises with the world?

buddha

With what’s it make acquaintance?
The world grasps after what indeed?
Why’s the world aﬄicted?

₁₇₀

Six with the world do co-arise,
with six becomes acquainted,
the world’s attached to six indeed,
so, world’s by six aﬄicted.

₁₇₁

hemavata The grasping—what is it then

by which the world’s aﬄicted?
When asked about this, please do speak:
how to be free from dukkha?

₁₇₂

58
buddha

sutta nipāta
The sensual pleasures ﬁve are taught
in the world with mind as six,
having let go of all desire for those,
be thus from dukkha free.

₁₇₃

This for the world’s the leading out,
its “as-it-is” declared to you,
and this to you I do declare:
be thus from dukkha free.

₁₇₄

hemavata Here, who goes across the ﬂood,

buddha

who goes across the sea,
No standpoint or support,
who in the deep sinks not?

₁₇₅

That person ever virtuous,
with wisdom, concentrated well,
with mind turned inward, mindful—
crosses the ﬂood that’s hard to cross.

₁₇₆

Detached from thoughts of sense-desire,
all fetters overpassed,
delight-in-being quite destroyed—
who in the deep sinks not.

₁₇₇

hemavata Behold the Great Seer of wisdom deep,

of subtle meanings Seer, one owning nought,
unattached to sensual being, free in every way,
proceeding along the pathway of the gods.

₁₇₈

Behold the Great Seer of perfect repute,
of subtle meanings Seer, of wisdom the imparter,
unattached to the senses’ basis and greatly wise,
all-knower, treading the path of the Noble Ones.

₁₇₉

1.9 sātāgira and hemavata the yakkhas

both

59

Well-viewed by us today indeed,
well-dawned upon us, well-arisen:
the Awaken One we’ve seen,
crossed the ﬂood, from inﬂows free.

₁₈₀

These ten hundred Yakkhas here
of great power and renown,
all of them for refuge go—
You are our Teacher unexcelled!

₁₈₁

Village to village we shall roam,
mount to mount revering him,
the Fully Awakened One, as well
the Dharmaness of Perfect Dharma.

₁₈₂
(Snp 153—182)

A few notes
Yakkha: who or what are they? They were, in the Buddha’s day, believed to be semi-spiritual beings who were powerful and rather easily
angered, living in wild places. Possibly they were members of aboriginal tribes who had proﬁciency in magical matter or were believed to
possess these. They were certainly feared.
153: mentions “the lunar ﬁfteenth day” which requires a little explanation. In the Buddha’s days the calendar was counted by the
moon’s action rather than the sun. “Months” of about 28 days,
thirteen of such lunar months approximating to a solar year at
364 days needed to be augmented to complete the sun year. New
Moons and Full Moons were important for these days measured
the uposatha days. The uposatha day was (and is) the gathering
of disciples who reconﬁrmed their dharma-practice twice every year on these two days by celebrating the chanting of the
Pātimokkha rules.

60

sutta nipāta

154: Hemavata asks whether Gotama’s mind is well-disposed towards
all beings—he is in fact asking about mettā/loving kindness.
While in the second two lines his enquiry regards wisdom, paññā.
He seems to be well-informed since these words cover both necessary approaches for awakening. “Within his power, are his
thought towards the wished, the unwished too”. Though it is possible to talk about “thought within one’s own power”, this is only
a way of speaking ﬁt for the awakened. For who is this assumed
person who possesses thoughts and can label them “mine”? It is
not that anything is owned, not even thoughts are owned by the
Awakened!
161: “Among dharmas Buddha (is) Eyed”: Dharmas are the qualities, virtuous and otherwise which manifest in mind, ﬂit though
it in a constant stream always changing. Many of these mindpatterns are disregarded, neglected or repressed by ordinary
people but their understanding of themselves sharpens as they
begin to practice mindfulness. With the maturity of mindfulness practice they can be called “Eyed”, those with insight, with
deep understanding of the way things really are. More upon Eyes
will be found at AN 3.29 where the eyeless, the one-eyed and the
two-eyed are explained.
162: “Are his inﬂows now extinct?” Inﬂows (āsava) are usually said
to be the inﬂow of sensual desire, the inﬂow of being/existence,
and that of ignorance, to which is occasionally added the inﬂow
of views. These are the deepest level of confused mind and are
frequently explained in the Suttas.
Sātagira rightly remarks: “for him all inﬂows are extinct, so
he will not again become”. Notice that “extinction” applies to the
inﬂows which are conditioned and are therefore impermanent.
The Buddha, though, will not be driven into becoming this or
that sort of being again. This does not mean that a Buddha will
disappear into a mysterious Nirvāṇa which is neither existence

1.9 sātāgira and hemavata the yakkhas

61

or non-existence. His condition is neither and beyond either the
extremes of nihilism and eternalism.
Three verses all opening with “Accomplished is the Sage’s
mind” have interesting ﬁnal lines:
164: “Rightly he is praised”: He’s praised for his actions and speech
which cause no suﬀering but bring beneﬁt—they are never harmful. The true Knowledge that he is possessed of is usually described as the threefold knowledge (tevijjā) consisting of the
knowledge of past lives, the knowledge of the future results of
karmas made, and should we not praise a person like this with
such virtues, though recommending him to others, or chanting
his praises in pujas, if we did not what sort of practitioners would
we be?
165: “Rightly you rejoice”—why would one do that? “Rejoice” here
means to rejoice in the knowledge—all the good things—of the
Teacher. Not to do so might mean that one was too proud to
acknowledge these virtues of the Teacher. Anumodanā, to rejoice
in another’s merits is to make very good karma indeed, while
not to do so points to a narrow egocentric mind.
166: “It’s good that we see Gotama”: “seeing” a Teacher is a traditional Dharma practice in India. “Seeing” a Teacher may be only
glimpsing him/her with the expectation that one will receive
a blessing in which case it is called dharshan (dassana in Pāli, a
verb related to the passāma, we see, which is found in the Snp
text). More deeply committed pupils will want to have closer
connection to their teacher: to see more than a brief glimpse, to
understand how to practice, or even to See or realise for themselves.
170: Hemavata, obviously a very intelligent yakkha, eventually asks
the Buddha a subtle question: “What co-arises with the world?”
etc. This line and others that he speaks shows his awareness, for
instance, that he knows that the world’s arising, in whatever way

62

sutta nipāta

one thinks of “world”, is according to Dharma, co-production—
produced from many causes. The second question poses diﬃculties which most translations have not solved, while mine is just
a shot in the dark. The third is straightforward, while the fourth
question treats the results of the third. The verse with its four
questions is partly a least a riddle.
171: On this occasion, the Buddha answers riddle with riddle and
does not really explain his reply to Hemavata’s questions. All
he seems to have done is add the number “six”—to each line
in the verse. It would be surprising if these two Yakkhas had
obtained the fullest satisfaction with this “explanatory” verse,
for the Buddha explained nothing. The Snp Commentary has
tried to account for this strange situation and “explains” what
the various sixes are. Buddhist understanding of creation is not
that there is a creating force beyond the world which somehow
brings forth in the world. Creation comes about as all necessary
factors arise for a world, those factors must “arise together”, or
as I have translated, “co-arise”.

1.10

With the Yakkha Āḷavaka
Āḷavaka Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Lord dwelt at Āḷavī in the haunt of the yakkha
Āḷavaka. Then the latter went to the Lord’s dwelling and spoke to him
as follows: “Monk, come out!”
“Very well, friend” said the Buddha (and came out).
“Monk, go in!”
“Very well, friend” said the Buddha and entered his dwelling. He
repeated these demands twice, but on the fourth demand the Buddha
said:
“I shall not come out to you, friend, do what you will.”
“Monk, I shall ask you a question and if you cannot answer it I shall
either overthrow your mind, split your heart, or seizing you by the
feet, throw you to the other side of the Ganges river.”
“I do not see, friend, anyone in the world with its devas, Māras and
Brahmās, in this generation with its monks and brahmins, princes and
men who can either overthrow my mind, or split my heart, or seize me
by the feet and throw me to the other side of the Ganges river. However,
friend, ask what you will.”
āḷavaka

buddha

āḷavaka

For humans here what wealth is best?
What often done brings happiness?
What surely has the sweetest taste?
How living do they say “life’s best”?

₁₈₃

Faith the wealth for humans best,
Dharma done brings happiness,
Truth surely has the sweetest taste,
“Lived with wisdom” this life’s best.

₁₈₄

How can the ﬂood be overcrossed?
How overcrossed the sea?

64

buddha

āḷavaka

buddha

sutta nipāta
How dukkha can be overcome?
How win to purity?

₁₈₅

By faith the ﬂood is overcrossed.
By vigilance the sea.
By eﬀort dukkha’s overcome.
By wisdom, purity.

₁₈₆

How wisdom will be won
with riches also found?
How attain to fame
and bring together friends?
When passing from this world, to next,
how does one not grieve?

₁₈₇

One with faith in arahats’ Dharma
for attainment of Nirvāṇa
diligent, wishing to listen,
and discerning, wisdom wins.

₁₈₈

One who acts appropriately,
who’s steady and industrious,
ﬁnds wealth and fame, attained by truth;
by giving, friends are gained.

₁₈₉

A faithful household seeker has
attained these four: truthfulness,
virtue, courage, generosity too,
and so grieves not when passing hence.

₁₉₀

Now if you wish, ask others too,
numerous monks and brahmins—if
truth, generosity, taming self,
patience too—what’s better than these?

₁₉₁

1.10 with the yakkha āḷavaka
āḷavaka

65

Why should I consult with these
monks and brahmins numerous,
when now for myself I know
who brings my future’s beneﬁt?

₁₉₂

For my beneﬁt truly He came here,
the Buddha visiting Āḷavī.
Now do I know where a gift
bestowed will bear great fruit.

₁₉₃

Village to village I shall roam,
town to town revering him—
the Full Awakened One, and
the Dharmaness of perfect Dharma.

₁₉₄
(Snp 183–194)

1.11

Victory Over Fascination with Bodies
Vijaya Sutta
Whether walking or standing still,
down one sits or lays it down,
bends it in or stretches it—
it’s just the body’s movement.

₁₉₅

This body by bones and sinews bound,
bedaubed by membranes, ﬂesh
and covered all over by skin—
not seen as it really is:

₁₉₆

Filled with guts, with stomach ﬁlled,
with bladder, liver-lump
with heart and lungs it’s ﬁlled,
with kidneys too and spleen.

₁₉₇

Liquids like spittle and snot
together with sweat and fat,
with blood and oil for the joints,
with bile and grease for the skin.

₁₉₈

Then by the streaming nine
impurity oozes out:
from the eye there’s dirt of eyes,
from ears, wax—dirt of ears,

₁₉₉

Whether walking or standing still,
down one sits or lays it down,
bends it in or stretches it—
it’s just the body’s movement.

₂₀₀

Snot-mucuses from nose,
vomit at times from the mouth,

1.11 victory over fascination

67

sometimes phlegm’s spewed forth,
and from the body sweat and dirt.

₂₀₁

And then within its hollow head
bundled brains are stuﬀed—
the fool thinks all is beautiful,
by ignorance led on.

₂₀₂

But when it’s lying dead,
bloated and livid blue,
cast away in the charnel-ground
kin care for it not.

₂₀₃

Then dogs devour, jackals too,
wolves and worms dismember it,
crows and vultures tear at it,
and other creatures too.

₂₀₄

Contemplate: this living body,
that corpse was once like this
and as that corpse is now
so will this body be—
for body then discard desire,
whether within or without.

₂₀₅

Such a monk who’s wise, desire
and lust discarded utterly,
attains to Deathlessness, to peace,
Nirvāṇa, the unchanging state.

₂₀₆

But this foetid, foul, two-footed thing,
is pampered, though ﬁlled
with varied sorts of stench, as well
with oozing here and there.⁷

₂₀₇

⁷ Sujato: I have changed the syntax of this verse a little.

68

sutta nipāta
Whoever such a body has,
but thinks to exalt themselves,
or to despise another—
what’s this but wisdom’s lack?

₂₀₈
(Snp 195–208)

Comments upon the Vijaya Sutta
Apart from attachments to one’s “own” mind, the next strongest bond
is to the body, one’s “own” of course but by extension to other bodies.
This is a Sutta ﬁt for two sorts of persons: one who wishes to practise
renunciation as a member of a monastic saṅgha; or second, one whose
sexual desires are very powerful. The teachings of this Sutta are not
so appropriate to those living a non-monastic life, or to people whose
desires are of less power. Still, everyone will beneﬁt from an occasional
perusal of this Sutta’s teachings, a reminder of the nature of this body
which we identify as “ours”.
The ﬁrst verse conveys the way the body really is, its movements
just movements, neither reﬁned nor gross. The movements are not
“mine” or “yours” they are merely the body’s. Leaving aside the embellishments, so much advertised and ﬂaunted in our times, as well as the
repulsive aspects of bodies—they are all just as they are, neither good
nor bad, neither beautiful or ugly, neither attractive nor repulsive. Of
course, this is advice to those who meditate and who wish to have some
success with their practice. Others may not understand.
Verse two starts to specify medicine for minds too much swayed by
lust. This Dharma-medicine will seem to the attached as rather bitter
in ﬂavour. The body, one’s own and others’, not seen as it really is, is
sketched in outline, bones, sinews, membranes, ﬂesh, and skin and
reminds one of the famous ﬁve: hair of the head, hair of the body, nails,
teeth and skin. These ﬁve are ﬁrst in the list of 32 parts recommended
for meditation and summarize precisely what we see when looking

1.11 victory over fascination

69

at another person. These are listed in the Khuddaka-pātha, whose
commentary discusses the 32 parts.
A few more choice ingredients of the body appear in verse 197.
These are parts and liquids that in general people are not happy to see,
especially when they are their own. But where should we be without
bones and sinews, or how to exist lacking guts and belly? We only look
on the outside of our own or others’ bodies and take for granted that
other more or less unpleasant hidden parts exist. Rather a one-sided
view of the body!
Continuing the list with emphasis on liquids, as found also in the
32 parts: “bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, (skin) grease, spit,
snot, oil-for-the-joints, piss”. The whole list may be a pre-Buddhist
medical list of the body’s contents, though surprisingly it ignores semen. The nine streams or impurity are explained in the next verse.
These are what ﬂows from: 2 eyes, 2 ears, 2 nostrils, 1 mouth, plus
the body. This adds up to eight. “Mouth” could be counted twice as two
sorts of impurity are mentioned: vomit and phlegm. Or “sweat” and
“dirt” may count as two from the body. The Pāli Commentary does not
clarify this. In other texts the body’s openings are counted as 2 eyes, 2
ears, 2 nostrils, mouth, urinary exit plus anus, making nine. Here, the
last two are absent, rather strange if “impurities” are being counted.
While it may seem to us that many people have hollow heads without any “bundled brains”, the real function of the brain was not appreciated in ancient India though many other parts of the body had
functions known to Ayurveda (medical) treatises.
The following verse, number 203, turns attention from internal
body bits to the body’s death. “Cast away in the charnel ground” refers
to a common way of recycling bodies in the Buddha’s days. A portion of
forest was declared both a crematory and a disposal point for bodies.
Cremating bodies cost more—trees to be felled or wood to be scavenged,
while taking the body to this secluded and forested area and leaving it
there after due rites was more economical. It is unlikely that the latter

70

sutta nipāta

will recommend itself to local councils, though ours are the days of
recycling. Perhaps we are more sentimentally attached to the corpse
of a dear one than were Indians of those times. This seems to have been
the case as “kin care for it not” and of course they do not care for the
corpse because there was no refrigeration then, so that its “bloated
and livid blue”, and most importantly what the text takes for granted,
its stench, is unbearable.
However, it was still attractive to some creatures who were very
happy to recycle it, as the next verse recalls. Susāna, the charnelground, was not a place for the faint-hearted. Those who delivered
bodies to be dealt with by ﬁre, or by decay or by creatures, did not hang
about there. Only some yogis/yoginīs and occasional bhikkhus/bhikkhunīs would be bold enough to stay there, especially through the
night. Most people would have found, and would ﬁnd today, such
serious reminders of impermanence too stark but serious Dharma
practitioners lived there without fear.
This tradition from pre-Buddhist times, through the Buddha’s lifetime about 2500 years ago, lasted in India at least another 1500 years.
We know this through the gory descriptions of such “boneyards” found
in Buddhist Tantras. These documents, some earlier around 500 ce and
some as late as 1000 ce, paint pictures of some fairly wild characters
dwelling in these places. They were at home not only with the ghastly
sights but also with various spiritual protectors as well as demonic
forces that dwelt there. There is no doubt that these practitioners, for
instance some of the famous 84 Siddhas, lived for long periods there
to their great beneﬁt.
A “bhikkhu” praised in the next verse, should be understood to
include any devoted practitioner. Of course, there are bhikkhus and
bhikkhus, a few wise but many without much practice and certainly
no insight. It is sad to say this but the mere fact of a man (or woman)
having shaven head and robes on does not guarantee spiritual awareness. There are so many people who assume otherwise and then lose

1.11 victory over fascination

71

all faith when their robed guru turns out to have worse than clay feet.
Knowing the body “as it really is” means that most of us do not
have thorough knowledge of it. Somehow we muddle on with a decaying body and only wake up a little when our bodies are in their last
drawn-out struggles. It is better to see how it really is long before that
time.
Verse 205 has been expanded in this translation. Literally the ﬁrst
two lines read:
As this (is) so (was) that,
as that (is), so (will be) this,
Though the Pāli meaning is clear, such brevity conveys little in
English. Those susāna were used for such reﬂection and helped to
discard desires whether for one’s own or others’ bodies.
Notice that the emphasis in this Sutta is upon using bodily bits
and corpses to see things as they truly are. It is uncharacteristic of
early Buddhist works to stir up hatred for the body, and accordingly
there is no trace of such hatred here. Other religious traditions, and to
some extent later Buddhist works, do emphasize hatred against the
body. This may be seen in some Pāli Commentaries as well as in some
Mahāyāna works; see for instance Chapter 8 of the Bodhicāryavatāra.

1.12

The Sage Inwardly Silent
Muni Sutta
From familiarity fear is born,
from household life arises dust;
no household, no familiar life—
such is the vision for the sage.

₂₀₉

Who, cutting down what has grown up,
plants not again, supplies no means for growth,
they call that Sage who fares alone;
great-seeker-seen-the-place-of-peace.

₂₁₀

Who has surveyed the grounds and lost the seeds,
and supplied no means for further growth,
is Sage seen to the end of birth and death,
logic abandoned and beyond reckoning.

₂₁₁

Truly have been known all resting-places
with no desires at all for any there—
that sage indeed, free from crowing, greed,
struggles not, gone to the further shore.

₂₁₂

Who is intelligent, knowing All, All overcome
among all the dharmas, one who cannot be sullied,
who All has abandoned, freed by craving’s end—
that one do the wise proclaim as a sage.

₂₁₃

In wisdom strong, in virtuous conduct established,
in concentration and enjoying jhāna,
free from all ties, aridity and the inﬂows—
that one do the wise proclaim as a sage.

₂₁₄

The vigilant sage who practises alone,
who unshaken is by blame or praise,

1.12 the sage inwardly silent

73

is as a lion that trembles not at sounds,
or as wind within a net cannot be caught,
or like a lotus ﬂower by water not deﬁled,
leading other people but not by others led—
that one do the wise proclaim as a sage.

₂₁₅

Who though oppressed, is unmoving as a pile-post,
when others about oneself use speech extreme;
that one free from lust, sense-faculties restrained—
that one do the wise proclaim as a sage.

₂₁₆

Who is straight-minded as shuttle straightly moves,
and who conduct examines both the rough and the smooth,
and so who turns away from evil karma-making—
₂₁₇
that one do the wise proclaim as a sage.
Who with a mind restrained, evil does not do,
whether young, middle-aged or sage self-controlled,
who cannot be provoked nor others does provoke—
that one do the wise proclaim as a sage.

₂₁₈

Who lives upon almsfood by others donated,
receiving the ﬁrst, the middle, or remainders at the end,
who then sings not owned praises, or hurtfully speak—
₂₁₉
that one do the wise proclaim as a sage.
The sage not practising indulgence in sex,
who even when youthful was not tied to anyone,
not indulgence in madness of wanton ways but free—
₂₂₀
that one do the wise proclaim as a sage.
True Knower of the universe, Seer of highest truth,
crossed the ocean’s ﬂood, One Thus and unattached,
One who’s knots are cut, with no inﬂows left—
that one do the wise proclaim as a sage.

₂₂₁

74

sutta nipāta
The householder with wife, and the “not-mine-maker”
of strict practices—their living-ways not the same:
house-livers not restrained from taking others’ lives,
₂₂₂
but the sage always guards other beings’ lives.
In ﬂight the crested peacock, turquoise-necked,
never the swiftness of the swan attains,
so a house-liver cannot match a bhikkhu,
a sage meditating in the woods.⁸

₂₂₃

(Snp 209–223)

On muni, mona, munāti and other matters
There are a group of related words in Pāli with meanings that cannot
be covered by a similar linguistic group in English. This can be seen
from the list below.
muni: (noun) sage, or perhaps a word not be translated.
mona: (noun) silence, solitary practice.
munāti: (verb) to be wise, speciﬁcally because of solitary life.
Originally, the person referred to was not a bhikkhu in the Buddhist
sense though the later Pāli Commentaries maintain that muni = solitary
bhikkhu. Evidence in the Suttas suggests that some disciples of the
Buddha lived as solitaries in the forest or in caves without the burden
of the monk’s rules, the Vinaya. This tradition of receiving instructions
from a teacher and then retiring for practice in solitude pre-dates the
Buddha. What we now call Hinduism had, and still has, many holy
men who practised among other things, silence to varying degrees.
The most extreme would never speak and lived in solitary places so
that they never had any cause to do so. There is, in Buddhist records an
⁸ Sujato: lkm had “so a house-liver and a bhikkhu cannot match a sage meditating
in the woods.” But this is a mistake: gihī is nominative, while bhikkhuno and munino
are dative/genitive and must agree.

1.12 the sage inwardly silent

75

example of bhikkhus who decide that during their ﬁrst Rains Retreat
they will refrain from talking. At the end of this three or four months
they return to visit the Buddha who asked them how their retreat
has been been. They tell him of their silence. He rebukes them that
they should practise silence like animals do.⁹ Human beings should
communicate and not act as they do for lack of speech. To this day, what
they wanted to practise was and is called mauna. The verb munāti is not
so common in Pāli but its existence demonstrates a further meaning:
wisdom derived from long periods of contemplation without much
conversation.
The last verse perhaps is not entirely true of our own times when
educated practitioners may be found among the laity. Many years ago
in my work on Vinaya (Moss on the Stones, unpublished), I had made
another and more elegant, translation of this verse:
As the peacock, azure-necked,
never rivals ﬂight of swans,
so householders are no match
for forest sage who meditates.
Finally, though it is not found in Pāli Buddhist tradition, there is
the well-known mantra for the praise of our great teacher when he is
called Śākyamuni:
Om Muni, Muni, Mahāmuni, Śākyamuni Svāha!

⁹ Sujato: lkm is referring to the origin story of the Pāvāraṇakkhandhaka, chapter
2 of the Vinaya Khandhakas. However, the Pali term there is mūgabbata “a vow of
dumbness”, not mauna, which is always associated with wisdom.

chapter 2

The Minor Chapter
2.1

The Threefold Gem
Ratana Sutta
Whatever beings are assembled here,
creatures of earth or spirits of the sky,
may they be happy-minded, every one,
and pay good heed to what is said to them.

₂₂₄

Hence, all ye spirits, hear attentively,
look lovingly upon the human race,
and, since they bring you oﬀerings day and night,
keep watch and ward about them heedfully.

₂₂₅

The riches of this world and of the next
and all precious things the heavens may hold,
none can compare with the Tathāgata.
Yea, in the Buddha shines this glorious gem:
By virtue of this truth, may blessing be!

₂₂₆

The waning out of lust, that wondrous state
of Deathlessness the Sakyan Sage attained
through calm and concentration of the mind—

₂₂₇

2.1 the threefold gem

77

nothing with that state can ought compare.
Yea, in the Dharma shines this glorious gem:
By virtue of this truth, may blessing be!

₂₂₈

That ﬂawless meditation praised by Him
who is the wisest of the wise, which brings
instant reward to one who practises—
naught with this meditation can compare.
Yea, in the Dharma shines this glorious gem:
By virtue of this truth, may blessing be!

₂₂₉

Those Persons Eight who all the sages praise,
make up four pairs. Worthy of oﬀerings
are they, the followers of the Happy one,
and oﬀerings made bear abundant fruit.
Yea, in the Saṅgha shines this glorious gem:
By virtue of this truth, may blessing be!

₂₃₀

Whoso, desireless, have applied themselves
ﬁrm-minded to the love of Gotama,
reached to the goal, plunged into Deathlessness,
freely enjoy Cool Peace they have attained.
Yea, in the Saṅgha shines this glorious gem:
By virtue of this truth, may blessing be!

₂₃₁

As a pillar ﬁrmly planted in the earth
Is unshaken by winds from the four directions,
So too, I say, is the True Person
Who sees the Noble Truths from their own experience.
Yea, in the Saṅgha is this glorious gem:
₂₃₂
By virtue of this truth, may blessing be!
Who clearly comprehend these Noble Truths
well-taught by him of wisdom fathomless,

78

sutta nipāta
however heedless be they afterwards
upon an eighth existence they’ll not seize.
Yea, in the Saṅgha is this glorious gem:
By virtue of this truth, may blessing be!

₂₃₃

As soon as one with insight is endowed,
three things become discarded utterly:
wrong view of a perduring self, and doubt,
and clinging to vain rites and empty vows.
Escaped that one from all four evil states,
and of the six great sins incapable.
Yea, in the Saṅgha is this glorious gem:
By virtue of this truth, may blessing be!

₂₃₄

Whatever sort of evil karma done—
by body even, or by speech or mind,
for one to hide these is not possible—
impossible for Seer of the State, it’s said.
Yea, in the Saṅgha is this glorious gem:
By virtue of this truth, may blessing be!

₂₃₅

Just as a forest grove puts forth its ﬂowers
when the ﬁrst month of summer heat has come,
so for the highest good of all, He taught
the truth sublime which to Nirvāṇa leads.
Yea, in the Buddha is this glorious gem:
By virtue of this truth, may blessing be!

₂₃₆

The Highest One, the Knower of the Highest,
the Giver and the Bringer of the Highest
’tis He who taught the Highest Truth of all.
Yea, in the Buddha is this glorious gem:
By virtue of this truth, may blessing be!

₂₃₇

2.1 the threefold gem

79

The old is withered up, new being there is not,
now their minds desire no future birth,
destroyed the seeds, no want for future growth,
extinguished are those wise ones as this lamp.
Yea, in the Saṅgha is this glorious gem:
By virtue of this truth, may blessing be!

₂₃₈

Whatever beings are assembled here,
creatures of the earth or spirits of the sky,
to th’ gods-and-men-adored Tathāgata,
to the Buddha let us bow: may blessing be!

₂₃₉

Whatever beings are assembled here,
creatures of earth or spirits of the sky,
to th’ gods-and-men-adored Tathāgata,
to the Dharma let us bow: may blessing be!

₂₄₀

Whatever beings are assembled here,
creatures of earth or spirits of the sky,
to th’ gods-and-men-adored Tathāgatha,
to the Saṅgha let us bow: may blessing be!

₂₄₁
(Snp 224–241)

2.2

Food and the True Meaning of “Stench”
Āmagandha Sutta

question

Wild millet, grains of grass and pulse,
young shoots and roots and jungle fruits—
Dharma-gained and by the Peaceful eaten,
they who speak no lies desiring sensual pleasures.

₂₄₂

But who, eating food that’s well-prepared and cooked
of Sālī-rice, all other things to eat,
delicious, by others donated specially
₂₄₃
that one, O Kassapa, is like a carrion-stench.

answer

“No carrion-stench is mine”, you say like this,
that it does not apply to you, O Brahma-kin—
while eating sālī-rice, all other things
with ﬂesh of fowls so very well prepared;
the meaning of this, O Kassapa, I ask:
Your food, what sort of carrion-stench it has?

₂₄₄

Taking life, torture, mutilation too,
binding, stealing, telling lies, and fraud;
deceit, adultery, and studying crooked views:
this is carrion-stench, not the eating of meat.

₂₄₅

Those people of desires and pleasures unrestrained,
greedy for tastes with impurity mixed in,
of nihilistic views, unstable, hard to train:
this is carrion-stench, not the eating of meat.

₂₄₆

The rough, the cruel, backbiters and betrayers,
those void of compassion, extremely arrogant,
the miserly, to others never giving anything:
this is carrion-stench, not the eating of meat.

₂₄₇

2.2 the true meaning of “stench”

81

Who’s angry, obstinate, hostile and vain,
deceitful, envious, a boastful person too,
full of oneself, with the wicked intimate:
this is carrion-stench, not the eating of meat.

₂₄₈

Those of evil ways, defaulters on debts,
imposters, slanderers, deceitful in their dealings,
vile men who commit evil deeds in this world:
this is carrion-stench, not the eating of meat.

₂₄₉

Those people unrestrained for living beings here,
taking others’ property, on injury intent,
immoral, harsh and cruel, for others no respect:
this is carrion-stench, not the eating of meat.

₂₅₀

Towards others greedy or hateful—they attack them,
ever on misdemeanours bent,
they go to darkness after death;
such beings as this fall headlong into Hell:
₂₅₁
this is carrion-stench, not the eating of meat.
Not from ﬁsh and ﬂesh tasting and not by nudity,
not by the plucking of head-hairs,
nor growing of matted locks,
not by the smearing of the ashes of the dead,
not wearing abrasive skins,
not following sacriﬁcial ﬁres,
or worldly austerities for gaining immortality,
nor mantras, nor oﬀerings,
oblations, seasons’ services
can purify a mortal still overcome by doubt.
Who lives with sense-streams guarded, well-aware,
in the Dharma ﬁrm, enjoying gently rectitude,

₂₅₂

82

sutta nipāta
beyond attachments gone, all dukkha left behind,
that wise one’s unsullied by the seen and the heard.

₂₅₃

narrator Again, again the Radiant One this topic taught

to that knower of the Vedas, in those mantras expert,
thus clariﬁed the Sage in verses sweetly-sounding.
₂₅₄
Him of no carrion-stench, free who’s hard to trace.
Having listened to these verses well-spoken by the Buddha,
free of such stench, all dukkhas dispelling,
he of humble heart bowed at the Tathāgata’s feet
and there and then requested his own Leaving-home. ₂₅₅
(Snp 242–255)

The meaning of āmagandha and other considerations
This short Sutta provides us with a number of puzzles beginning with
its title. It is critical how this compound of āma and gandha is translated. Āma originally meant “raw” or “uncooked” while gandha is a
general word for “smell” which can be qualiﬁed by adding the preﬁxes
su “good”, or du “bad”. One might assume from this that the meaning
of these words compounded should be “the smell of uncooked food”. In
fact, they came to mean “the smell of raw (meat)”. By extension, and
considering the lack of refrigeration in tropical India in ancient times
and the speed with which raw meat goes oﬀ, it implied “the stench of
carrion”.
Past translators have struggled with this complex word:
“such are ﬂesh-savours and not eating meat” (E.M. Hare)
“this is a stench. Not the eating of meat” (Saddhātissa)
“this is tainted fare, not the eating of ﬂesh” (Norman/Horner)
“the foul smell of carrion, not the eating of ﬂesh” (Jayawickrama)
These are four examples of the refrain in verses 245–251 according
to the authors above. However it is translated it must apply both to

2.2 the true meaning of “stench”

83

eating meat and the bad “smell” of evil karma. This is because the
Buddha in these verses lists evil conduct as “carrion-stench” of great
import, as opposed to “the eating of meat”, which is a much lesser
matter. Brahmins particularly proclaimed their purity because they
adhered to a vegetarian diet, while looking down upon some lower
castes who ate meat. To this day while travelling in India one may be
asked by a high-caste person if one is a vegetarian. A positive answer
to this question will gain one several points of esteem in that brahmin’s
mind. This is based upon a common Hindu teaching which could be
called the doctrine of “purity through eating”. If only purity was so
easy! The Buddha’s verses in this Sutta point out what is truly impure.
However, this should not be taken as a rejection of vegetarian food or a
denial of its beneﬁts, specially that it involves no slaughter of animals.
Earlier Buddhist views about this are inﬂuenced by the example of
the Buddhist monk or nun’s behaviour going upon alms round with
their bowls, accepting to eat this day whatever food they are oﬀered
and then eating it without the discrimination “this is good, this is not”.
Such an attitude is reasonable for monks and nuns who have no money
and so cannot choose what they will have. But laypeople who do have
money are able to choose and may give food which has not involved
killing. And many monks these days do have money. Later Buddhists,
as monastic institutions grew in size, perceived that it would be better
to advise their donors to adhere to vegetarian diets and to give monastics, from a concern for the animals killed, vegetarian food. Even with
this consideration, the main emphasis for all Buddhists is upon the
mind, with less stress upon food. That this is correct may be seen from
the presence of occasional extremist vegetarians whose concern for
a particular diet based upon some “view” of food is in their eyes the
most important feature of practising Dharma, while to others their
doctrines are a neurotic obsession.
At a few places in the Suttas, including this Sutta, it seems that
the Buddha when he was oﬀered food containing meat, ate it. Possibly,

84

sutta nipāta

since references to this are few, this was a rare event. If challenged
the Buddha would give most importance to the state of mind and very
much less to the content of food. And it is worth our consideration,
though this cannot be an excuse for indulgence, that even the purest
of vegans will not be able to eat anything without the destruction of
some living beings: to live is dependent upon eating; to eat is to destroy.
This is saṁsāra—the wandering through birth and death—and has its
dark side, though compassion may limit this.
Another odd matter about this Sutta is its participants—only two
of them, once a brahmin, Tissa, and the other a Buddha called Kassapa. At least this is what the Commentary says. In the Sutta itself the
name “Tissa” does not occur while the expounder of the Dharma is
just called “Kassapa”. Now, both these names are very common in the
Suttas where dozens of Tissas occur and many Kassapas as well. While
the interlocutor may well have been a brahmin called Tissa, that the
Kassapa here should have been a Buddha is more doubtful. There is
a Buddha by that name in DN 14, and if we take that reference literally, he lived very long ago. To claim, as Commentary does, that that
remote Buddha and that the Kassapa of this Sutta are the same makes
for diﬃculties. The most obvious of these is found in Pāli Commentaries that claim that a new Buddha cannot arise until all marks of a
previous Buddha—teachings, robes, stupas, images and so on—have
disappeared. This may be called a rather “late” doctrine and in our eyes
these days a rather unimportant one. Still if the Commentary is examined the question will arise: How did this supposed Sutta from the
mouth of the Buddha Kassapa survive the intervening aeons to appear
eventually in the text of Snp? As this is such a doubtful matter and
one which cannot be resolved we are faced with either its acceptance
as a wonderful survival from another Budda’s era, or more likely the
verses of a disciple of “our” Buddha, one of a number of disciples called
Kassapa. This however, will not explain references to a Buddha in the
last two verses.

2.2 the true meaning of “stench”

85

Two other minor matters may be mentioned here. Verse 252 gives
poetically a list of wrong practises, wrong because by themselves they
will not lead to liberation though some of them may have value. These
austerities, mild or severe, were not praised by the Buddha as he was
surrounded, outside his own disciples, by extremist doctrines and practitioners, who held the wrong view that liberation was to be attained
by dukkha. A similar but shorter verse is found at Dhp 141:
Neither going naked, nor matted hair, nor ﬁlth,
nor fasting, nor sleeping on the earth,
no penance on the heels, nor sweatiness, nor grime,
can purify a mortal still overcome by doubt.
Whoever the Kassapa was, he was faced by a Tissa who was either
stupid or prejudiced, since the teacher had to repeat his teaching again
and again according to verse 254!
A further use of this word in Snp at verse 723 is in the negative
form nirāmagandha where it is translated “carrion-stench”, but seems
to refer not to food but to sex.

2.3

“Conscience” and so on
Hiri Sutta
Though this person says “I am your friend”,
nothing’s done for you as comrade would,
but bereft of conscience, e’en despising you:
as “not one of mine” this person should be known.

₂₅₆

Who uses pleasant words to friends
but does not act accordingly,
wise people understand like this:
“a speaker not a doer.”

₂₅₇

That one’s no friend who diligently
seeks your faults, desiring strife;
but with whom one rests, as child on breast,
is friend indeed who none can part.

₂₅₈

One who causes states of joy,
who brings praiseworthy happiness,
who’s grown the Fruits’ advantages,
the human burden bears.

₂₅₉

Having drunk of solitude
and tasted Peace sublime,
free from sorrow, evil-free,
one savour: Dharma’s joy.

₂₆₀
(Snp 256–260)

Notes on the Hiri Sutta
First, a few words upon the translation of hiri into English. Most translators have used “shame” but there are many objections to this: hiri as a

2.3 conscience

87

quality in the Suttas and Abhidhamma is wholesome, a good quality. It
features notably in the Suttas at AN 2.8–9 where hiri and its companion
ottappa are translated as “shame and fear of blame” (Gradual Sayings,
pts) though the translator in a footnote has “conscientiousness” as an
alternative for the ﬁrst of these. This ungainly word is preferable to
“shame”, as the latter in English could not be called totally wholesome
being associated, as it is, with guilt. Hiri and its companion by contrast
are called bright (sukka) dharmas and praised as world’s protectors.
They protect the world from degeneration to greed, hatred and delusion. Protecting the world has two meanings—protecting the mind of
the potential doer, and protecting others from the suﬀerings brought
about by unrestrained evil.
Ñāṇamoli in his translations suggests “shamefulness” for hiri but
this does not cover subsidiary meanings such as “shyness” or “bashfulness” which cannot be described as wholesome qualities. “Conscience”
will be appropriate in some places and “modesty” in others, sometimes
even “decency”. It is diﬃcult to ﬁnd an English word to cover all this.
Ottappa is best translated as “fear of consequences” and with hiri acts
as a brake for some peoples’ unwholesome drives.
The verses of this Sutta are a rag-bag; bits and pieces from here
and there somehow cobbled together with little attention to coherence. Though called the Hiri Sutta, it is not mostly about conscience,
decency, shame etc., but rather concerns the qualities of a good friend.
The Pāli Commentary tries to make sense of these verses by giving
them an invented occasion when a brahmin asked of the Buddha four
questions. However this seems an artiﬁcial “explanation” and has led
to some strange translations. (For the four questions see Saddhātissa’s
translation).
The ﬁrst three verses are straightforward but the fourth has had
many and varied translations. I have not followed the Pāli Commentary
in interpreting this Sutta. The fourth verse describes a person who has
fully practised the Dharma and is ﬁt to be a teacher of others, a bod-

88

sutta nipāta

hisattva perhaps since he/she bears the human burden by removing it
from others who suﬀer. A true friend indeed!
Verse 5, a favourite of mine, is from the Dhammapada (205) while
verse 2 appears also at Jataka iii 193, Vaṇṇāroha Jātaka, No. 361.

2.4

The Supreme Good Omens
Mahāmaṅgala Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Radiant One was dwelling at Jeta’s Grove in the park
of Anāthapiṇḍika near Sāvatthī. Then, as night was ending, a deva of
surpassing radiance, illuminating the whole of Jeta’s Grove, went up
to the Radiant One and stood to one side after saluting him. Standing
there that deva addressed the Radiant One with a verse:
deva

buddha

Of humans, gods, there are so many
who have sought to know good omens
which, they hope, will bring them safety:
tell then the supreme good omen.

₂₆₁

Not consorting with the foolish,
rather with the wise consorting,
honouring the honourable:
this is a supreme good omen.

₂₆₂

Living in beﬁtting places,
having in the past made merit,
right direction in self-guidance:
this is a supreme good omen.

₂₆₃

Ample learning, and a craft, too,
with a well-trained disciplining,
any speech that is well-spoken:
this is a supreme good omen.

₂₆₄

Aid for mother and for father,
and support for wife and children,
spheres of work that bring no conﬂict:
this is a supreme good omen.

₂₆₅

90

sutta nipāta
Giving, practising by Dharma,
with support for kin provided,
karmas causing no obstructions:
this is a supreme good omen.

₂₆₆

Shrinking, abstinence, from evil,
from besotting drink refraining,
diligence in Dharma-practice:
this is a supreme good omen.

₂₆₇

Respectfulness, a humble manner,
contentedness, and grateful bearing,
hearing Dharma when it’s timely:
this is a supreme good omen.

₂₆₈

Patience, meekness when corrected,
visiting too those pure in practice,
discussing Dharma when it’s timely:
this is a supreme good omen.

₂₆₉

Ardour, and the Good life leading,
insight into Truths so Noble,
realization of Nirvāṇa:
this is a supreme good omen.

₂₇₀

Though one is touched by Worldly Dharmas
yet one’s mind does never waver,
grieﬂess, spotless and secure:
this is a supreme good omen.

₂₇₁

Having practised all these “omens”
everywhere they go unvanquished,
they go everywhere in safety:
such is their supreme good omen.

₂₇₂
(Snp 261–272)

2.4 the supreme good omens

91

False maṅgalas and Dharma-maṅgalas
In the Buddha’s days, as in our own, people adhered to the superstitious
ideas of what is lucky/unlucky, auspicious and its opposite and even
“religious” omens of fortune and misfortune. Such events, happenings
and bodily marks have of course varied through the ages but the ideas
and superstitions connected with it remain a part of many peoples’
lives. India being a vast country with many languages and cultural
diﬀerences, then as now, had diﬀering traditions about what was lucky
but no certainty could be reached about the underlying reasons why
“a” was lucky and “b” unlucky. Tradition could not agree about it. This
is what the Maṅgala Sutta’s ﬁrst verse is about. Devas and humans
decided to ask the Buddha about this matter.
Before we read his list of 37 “supreme good omens”, we should
be clear about the usual understanding of omen. An example that
I encountered years ago in Thailand will illustrate the tangled and
confused nature of omens generally.
In Thailand, where bhikkhus usually go out to collect their food
with their bowls in the early morning, the sight of a monk or several
of them, as soon as the house or shop door is opened, is reckoned to
be very auspicious. This “auspiciousness” does not take account of
whether the monk or monks are ennobled by their Dharma practice,
or whether they are guys using the robes to get an easy livelihood.
This “omen” of the sight of early morning monks of whatever kind, is
reckoned “good”.
Opposed to this illogic is the idea held by Chinese, of whom there
are many in Bangkok and other Thai cities. If they behold a monk ﬁrst
thing in the morning, this is reckoned in their tradition as inauspicious, not a good day for the making of money. Why? Though it is hard
to believe, the argument goes thus: Monks own nothing (at least they
are not supposed to own much) and they teach a doctrine of nothing
(a confused reference to what is called “emptiness” or “voidness” in
English), so they are ill-omened for businessmen! Here are two cul-

92

sutta nipāta

tures with quite opposed ideas upon a supposed omen! Is one more
true than the other? No, both are superstitions, because the reason
behind these “omens” is not based upon cause and eﬀect. The causes
(seeing monks) have no real relation to the supposed eﬀects of either
auspicious (Thai idea) or inauspicious (Chinese).
In some cultures which are supposed to be scientiﬁcally “advanced”,
still many may be found who adhere without thought to ancient superstitions about what is good, lucky, or an omen. The Buddha’s standard
of auspiciousness transcends these confused ideas and oﬀers a clear
summary of what is truly beneﬁcial for everyone irrespective of race,
language, culture, and religion.
The Sutta, which is straightforward, does not need a detailed commentary, though if one is required, the classical Pāli Commentary upon
this Sutta is translated in Minor Readings and Illustrator published by
the Pāli Text Society. The translation of this book and of the Sutta
quoted here is by Ven. Ñāṇamoli Thera, who tirelessly devoted his
life to rendering many Pali texts into English, some of them quite abstruse. In his honour, and with the permission of the pts, I quote his
translation here with one or two minor changes.
One note upon the line: “Though one is touched by Worldly Dharmas” may be useful. What are the worldly dharmas that one may be
touched by? This refers to the famous eight lokadhammā found principally in AN 8.5–6. In my old translation made in Wat Bovoranives,
Bangkok, the verses of this Sutta read as follows:
Gain and loss together with honour and dishonour,
blame and praise, happiness, dissatisfaction¹ too,
these, the impermanent conditions of mankind
never perpetual, perturbate are they:
these, the heedful one with wisdom well-endowed
carefully discerns as conditions perturbate.
¹ “Dissatisfaction” = dukkha.

2.4 the supreme good omens

93

Desirable conditions do not agitate the mind,
nor conditions undesired and can make resentment rise,
compliance, opposition too, are for that one no more,
not smouldering are they, to non-existence gone;
and then having Known that Stainless, Grieﬂess State,
(AN 8.6)
rightly one Knows becomings’ Other Shore.

2.5

To the Yakkha Sūciloma
Sūciloma Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Radiant One was dwelling in Gaya at the Stone
Couch in the place of the yakkha Sūciloma. At that time the yakkhas
Khara and Sūciloma paused nearby and the former said: “That is a
monk”. “He’s not a monk, he’s just a ‘mere-monk’; but wait until I ﬁnd
out whether he’s a monk or a ‘mere-monk’.”
Then the yakkha Sūciloma approached the Radiant One and pressed
his body against him, at which the Radiant One drew back. The yakkha
then said to him, “Are you afraid of me, monk?” “Friend, I am not afraid
of you, but your touch is evil.”
“Monk, I shall ask you a question and if you do not reply to me I
shall overturn your mind, split your heart, and grasping you by the
feet ﬂing you to the other side of the Ganges.”
“Friend, I do not see anyone indeed who in this world with its devas,
Māras and Brahmā-gods, together with its people—monks and brahmins, rulers and ordinary persons—who could overturn my mind,
split my heart and grasping me by the feet ﬂing me to the other side of
the Ganges. Still, friend, you can ask whatever you wish.”
Then the yakkha Sūciloma addressed the Radiant One with this
verse.
sūciloma From whence the causes of both lust and hate,

buddha

from what are likes, dislikes and terror born,
what origin’s there for thoughts in mind,
as boys harass a (captive) crow?

₂₇₃

From causes here come lusts and hate,
from here, likes, dislikes and terror’s born,
present origin’s there for the thoughts in mind,
as boys release a (captive) crow.

₂₇₄

2.5 to the yakkha sūciloma

95

Born of lubricity, arisen from self,
bearing branch-born roots as the banyan ﬁgs,
such are they in sensuality entwined,
as woods entangled by the stinky-vine.

₂₇₅

Listen, O yakkha, for those who know,
from where these causes come—all they dispel,
they cross this ﬂood so hard to cross,
uncrossed before, to not become again.

₂₇₆

(Snp 273–276)

Remarks upon Sūciloma Sutta
Yakkhas are perhaps demonized wild non-ariyan inhabitants who lived
in forests and had few possessions, but some reputation in magical
matters. Sūciloma, a name meaning “needle-hair” was possibly a very
hairy male, though one may doubt that his hair was needle-like. The
Buddha’s remark that he was not afraid of him but that his touch was
“evil” may mean that this yakkha was unwashed and malodorous. Yet
even though he seems to have been uncouth, the question he asked is
not that of an ignorant person.
The question-verse in its ﬁrst three lines has the Pāli interrogative
kuto, “whence, from where, from what”. Kutonidāna in the ﬁrst line
means “from whence the causes”, kutojā in the second translates “born
from what”, while the third line has kuto samuṭṭhāya is “from what
origin”. This question is framed very much in Buddhist teaching: the
enquiry into causality.
The simile in the last line raises a number of questions, the ﬁrst
of them being, what is it that boys do to a crow? We are not told in
the Sutta about this and most translators have resorted to the Pāli
Commentary. There it is explained that boys catch a crow, tie string to
its legs, and let it go as far as the string permits when they jerk it and
so crash the crow. Sounds like boys generally have not changed much!

96

sutta nipāta

This may be true, or perhaps the Commentary has based its tale on
later behaviour of boys! As the line reads it is literally “as boys a crow
… ” The space here is for translation of the verb ossajjati which pts
Dictionary says means “to let loose, let go, send oﬀ, give up, dismiss,
release”, while Cone’s A Dictionary of Pāli adds “lets go, releases, throws,
abandons”. The Pāli Commentary glosses this verb with khipati, to
throw.
Translators so far have rendered the simile: “drag down as boys will
drag a crow” (E.M. Hare), “(harass) as boys do a crow” (Saddhātissa),
“as young boys toss up a (captive) crow” (K.R. Norman), “like (tethered)
crow pulled by boys captors) earthward” (Mrs Rhys Davids in Kindred
Sayings, Saṁyutta Nikāya, Vol. I), and “(toss one around) as boys toss up
a crow” (Bhikkhu Bodhi in Connected Discourses of the Buddha, Saṁyutta
Nikāya). While the ossajjati will support such translations as “drag”,
“toss up”, “pull”, etc, it cannot stretch to “harass”: “harass” and even
“torture” are what the boys are undoubtedly doing to the crow, an
interpretation rather than a translation. As khipati = “to throw” is a
commentarial gloss this gives more latitude.
The simile of the boys and the crow is interesting and unusual. The
Commentary explains that the boys represent the thoughts, while the
crow is the mind which is either harassed or released. No doubt the
Pāli Commentary identiﬁes the boys as unwholesome states of mind
and this is ﬁtting in the ﬁrst verse but even if the same meaning is
given to the simile in the second verse, it will not ﬁt. Suppose that
one chooses “toss around” as the translation for ossajjati in both verses
this is only appropriate for the verse, not for the Buddha’s reply. All
translators without exception, in following the Commentary, repeat
the same rendering of the simile in both verses. But now, supposing
that the Buddha has played with the multiple meanings of the verb
ossajjati, so that a diﬀerent meaning in the second verse is appropriate
in translation?
To appreciate that this might be so, we have to consider the mean-

2.5 to the yakkha sūciloma

97

ings of ito which replaces kuto in the second verse. In this verse ito
appears three times and is rendered “here”, “now”, and “present”. The
Buddha in this verse has emphasized that “causes”, “birth”, and “origin” are not so much a matter of the past, especially of such beliefs as
in past lives, as the ﬁrst verse suggests, but concern the present. This
emphasis on the present ties in with such teachings as:
One should not trace back the past
or on the future build one’s hopes,
the past is just the left-behind,
the future is the yet-unreached;
rather with insight one should see
each dharma as it arises now …
(MN 131 Bhaddekaratta Sutta)
And of course with the practice of mindfulness.
As the second verse deals with causality in the present moment
which would lead to Awakening in the present, and as the verb ossajjati
can mean “release, let go, loose”, it seems appropriate to translate the
line as: “as boys release a (captive) crow”.
This pair of Pāli verses could be corrupt, as traditions other than
the Pāli texts vary widely. The Sutta is repeated in SN 10.3 and readers
should consult portions of the Commentary translated in Connected
Discourses of the Buddha, Vol. 1, for further information.

2.6

Wrong Conduct in the Bhikkhu’s Life
Dhammacariya Sutta
The Good Life living, with Dharma accordingly,
they say that this is wealth supreme.
But if one leaves the household life
gone forth from home to homelessness

₂₇₇

and then be one of those foul-mouthed,
beast-like, delighted doing harm,
such a one’s of evil life
increasing “dust” within himself,

₂₇₈

a bhikkhu delighting in quarrelling
while in delusion wrapped,
knows not the Dharma even when
it’s by the Buddha pointed out;

₂₇₉

led along by ignorance so
that one harms those of well-grown mind,
and does not know deﬁlements’ path
that leads to hellish life.

₂₈₀

To Downfall going on and on,
from life to life, from dark to dark,
a bhikkhu such as this indeed
hereafter to dukkha descends.

₂₈₁

One such with blemishes is like
a public shit-pit ﬁlled to the brim,
used for many years,
so very hard to clean.

₂₈₂

O bhikkhus, when you come to know
one such attached to household life—

2.6 wrong conduct in the bhikkhu’s life

99

of evil desires and evil thoughts
and of evil ways of behaviour,

₂₈₃

all of you united then
should shun, avoid a person such,
blow away these sweepings and
throw away that trash,

₂₈₄

and suchlike chaﬀ winnow away—
those sham monks, those conceited monks—
having blown them oﬀ, those who are
of evil wants and wrong resorts,

₂₈₅

then living in purity with the pure
with mindfulness you will abide,
in concord live, intelligent—
you will arrive at dukkha’s end.

₂₈₆
(Snp 277–286)

Notes on the Dhammacariya Sutta
This Sutta is unusual in that it contains no indication of who is teaching,
though one may assume that it is the Buddha. Of course, the Commentary oﬀers an occasion for its teaching and makes it plain that the
Buddha is exhorting the bhikkhus. Though called “Dhammacariya”
it could better be known as the Adhammacariya Sutta as most of the
verses concern the wrong conduct of a bhikkhu.
The language of condemnation of wayward monks is here quite
strong and is directed at those who have major failings rather than peccadilloes. Obviously, such monks were hard to reform and the verses
in the middle part of this Sutta advise monks to avoid such people.
Perhaps they were considered irreformable and there is certainly no
suggestion here of compassionate action towards them.

100

sutta nipāta

In one sense, just as all humans can be labelled “crazy”, so we are
all “shit-pits” to some degree. Only those ennobled by the Dharma
are free of these taints. So then the language of some of these verses
seems unnecessarily severe. Perhaps these stanzas were composed
by a particularly self-righteous monk who felt himself far above the
failing of his brethren. How they came to be attributed to the Buddha
is unknown.

2.7

How Brahmins Lived by the Dharma
Brāhmaṇadhammika Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Radiant One dwelt at Sāvatthī, in the Jeta Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika’s park. Then many decrepit old Kosalan brahmins, aged,
elderly, advanced in years, attained to old age, those indeed of palatial
abodes, went to the Radiant One and exchanged greeting with him.
When this courteous and amiable talk was ﬁnished they sat down to
one side. Sitting there these brahmins of palatial abodes said, “Master Gotama, are there now to be seen any brahmins who practise the
Brahmin Dharma of the brahmins of old?”
“No, brahmins, there are no brahmins now to be seen who practise
the Brahmin Dharma of the brahmins of old.”
“It would be excellent if the good Gotama would speak to us upon
the Dharma of the brahmins of old if it would not be too much trouble.”
“Then brahmins, listen well and bear in mind what I shall say”.
“Indeed, venerable” said those brahmins of palatial abodes to the
Radiant One. He spoke as follows:
In ancient times the sages then
austerely lived, were self-restrained,
let go ﬁve bases of desire
to fare for their own beneﬁt.

₂₈₇

Brahmins then no cattle had,
no gold, no grain they hoarded up,
their grain, their wealth was Vedic lore—
this the treasure they guarded well.

₂₈₈

For them, whatever food prepared
was by the doorway placed
from faith prepared for those who sought,
for (donors) thought it should be given.

₂₈₉

102

sutta nipāta
Then in various states and provinces
rich in colourful cloths well-dyed
with furniture and dwellings too
with these to brahmins they paid respect.

₂₉₀

Unbeaten were brahmins and inviolate—
guarded by Dharma-goodness then,
none hindered or obstructed them
when they arrived at household doors.

₂₉₁

Until the age of eight-and-forty
they practised celibate student life—
the brahmins of those ancient times
fared seeking knowledge and conduct good.

₂₉₂

Those brahmins went not to others’ wives
nor bought a wife from other clans;
by mutual consent together they came,
being happy with each other.

₂₉₃

Brahmins then did not indulge
in sexual intercourse out of time,
during menstruation,
but only when wives were free from this.

₂₉₄

The celibate life was praised by them
with virtue and uprightness,
friendliness, penance and gentleness,
harming none and patient too.

₂₉₅

Whoso ’mong them strong eﬀorts made
resembling Brahma, best,
he never did engage in sex
not even in a dream.

₂₉₆

2.7 how brahmins lived by the dharma

103

Then some of them with wisdom blest
followed his practice path
praising the celibate life, as well
as virtue and as patience too.

₂₉₇

Having begged rice, butter and oil,
with cloths and bedding too,
they sought and stored these righteously,
and from them made a sacriﬁce:
during that sacriﬁcial rite
cattle they never killed.

₂₉₈

Like mother (they thought), father, brother
or any other kind of kin,
cows are our kin most excellent
from whom come many remedies.

₂₉₉

Givers of good and strength, of good
complexion and the happiness of health,
having seen the truth of this
cattle they never killed.

₃₀₀

Those brahmins then by Dharma did
what should be done, not what should not,
and so aware they graceful were,
well-built, fair-skinned, of high renown.
While in the world this lore was found
these people happily prospered.

₃₀₁

But then in them corruption came
for little by little they observed
how rajahs had to splendours won
with women adorned and elegant,

₃₀₂

104

sutta nipāta
and chariot, yoked to thoroughbreds,
caparisoned, embroideries ﬁnely sewn,
and houses well-designed with walls—
insides divided into rooms,

₃₀₃

ﬁlled with crowds of women fair
and ringed by herds of increasing cows—
all this the eminent wealth of men
the brahmins coveted in their hearts.

₃₀₄

Then they composed some Vedic hymns
and went chanting to Okkāka king:
“Great your wealth and great your grain,
make sacriﬁce to us with grain and wealth”.

₃₀₅

That rajah, Lord of chariots,
by brahmins was persuaded so
he oﬀered all these sacriﬁces:
of horses, men, the peg well-thrown,
the sacriﬁce of soma drink
the one of rich results—
while to the brahmins wealth he gave:

₃₀₆

of cattle, bedding and of cloth
with women adorned and elegant
and chariots yoked to thoroughbreds
caparisoned, embroideries ﬁnely sewn,

₃₀₇

dwelling in which one would delight,
these well-divided into rooms
and many diﬀerent kinds of grain,
this wealth he to the brahmins gave.

₃₀₈

When they had all this wealth received
to hoard it up was their desire

2.7 how brahmins lived by the dharma

105

for they were overwhelmed by greed—
their craving thus increased—
so they composed more Vedic hymns
and chanting went to Okkāka king.

₃₀₉

“As water is, and earth, as well
as gold, as grain as well as wealth,
in the same way for human beings,
and cattle are necessities;
Great your wealth and great your grain,
make sacriﬁce to us with grain and wealth”.

₃₁₀

That rajah, lord of chariots,
by brahmins was persuaded—so
in sacriﬁce, he caused to kill
cattle in hundreds, thousands too.

₃₁₁

But neither with hooves nor horns
do cows cause harm to anyone,
gentle they are as sheep
yielding us pails of milk;
in spite of this the rajah seized
their horns, slew them by the sword.

₃₁₂

Then devas, antigods, demons, led
by Indra, even the ancestors,
cried out “Against the Dharma is all this!”
while fell the sword upon the cows.

₃₁₃

In former times three ills were found:
desire and hunger and decay;
but due to the killing of cattle,
ninety-eight diseases came.

₃₁₄

106

sutta nipāta
This adharmic wielding of weapons,
descended from times of old:
in this are the innocents slain,
while ritual priests from Dharma fell.

₃₁₅

So this ancient practice, base,
is censured by the wise;
where similar things are seen,
people blame the ritual priests.

₃₁₆

When Dharma was perverted thus,
merchants and workers split apart,
and warrior-nobles split as well,
while wife her husband did despise.

₃₁₇

Then nobles and those of Brahmā “kin”
and others restrained by love of caste,
neglected then their laws on “birth”
and under the sway of pleasures came.

₃₁₈

When this was said the brahmins of palatial abodes exclaimed to
the Radiant One: “Magniﬁcent, Master Gotama! The Dharma has been
clariﬁed by Master Gotama in many ways, as though he was ﬁghting
what had been overturned, revealing what was hidden, showing the
way to one who was lost, or holding a lamp in the dark so that those with
eyes could see forms. We go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dharma
and to the Saṅgha. May Master Gotama remember us as upāsakas who
from today have Gone for Refuge for life.”
(Snp 287–318)

2.7 how brahmins lived by the dharma

107

The rich old Brahmins and the Buddha
What happened?
Imagine the scenario: the Buddha is seated in the grounds of the Jeta
Grove outside the prosperous city of Sāvatthī (Śrāvasti). A number
of really old brahmins who are also rich come to call on the Buddha,
no doubt in chariots, and with servants and possibly pupils as well.
That they are old is insisted upon by the use in the text of no less than
six adjectives to this eﬀect, so we may picture them in the 70s, 80s or
90s even. That they are rich is described by only one word mahāsāla,
literally “of great halls”, surrounded no doubt by great estates from
which they derived much wealth. As was the custom among Indians,
especially brahmins, in approaching a Teacher, they ﬁrst exchanged
greetings and no doubt their names with the Buddha, and we are told
that this included “courteous and amiable talk”. This was taken to be a
polite and auspicious beginning to contact with a Teacher. Sitting to
one side is also polite, in this way a visitor does not presume to occupy
the space immediately opposite the Teacher. Then one of these rich
old brahmins speaking on behalf of the others, asked his astonishing
Question.
At this point we may pause in our imagination of the scene and
bring to the fore our examining faculties: Why did these old brahmins
ask the Buddha a question which they must have known would receive
a negative reply? They would know—perhaps partly from their own
lives—that brahmins of their times conducted themselves far diﬀerently from the ideal brahmins of the past. And of course the Buddha
denied that there were any brahmins in their times who lived according to the ancient brahmin Dharma. The old brahmins then asked him
very politely, (“if it would not be too much trouble”) to discourse upon
this subject.
The puzzle posed by the Sutta is why the brahmins asked this particular question. They would know the conditions of most brahmins

108

sutta nipāta

in their society: a glimpse of this may be had from some verses of Snp
618–625. There we learn that so-called brahmins were farmers, craftsmen, merchants, servants, thieves, soldiers, priests and rajahs. But the
Buddha’s very high standards on what constituted a brahmin (626–653)
went far beyond these worldly descriptions.
From their studies of the Vedas and auxiliary literature, they would
know how brahmins were portrayed in the distant past, so why did
they, according to this text, ask the Buddha about this. It could be that
some of them were curious as to how the Buddha would reply, for, after
all, he was not regarded by them as an “orthodox” brahminical teacher.
Perhaps he would give a scathing account of brahmin behaviour which
they could then argue with him. Or perhaps they wished an answer
from a teacher they knew to be famous who would see this question
in a diﬀerent light. In general though, the brahmins in the Pāli Suttas are portrayed as orthodox and conservative, having little interest
in exploring others’ teachings. There are notable exceptions, as with
Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja at Snp 3.9, but most brahmins did not welcome other teachers examining and criticizing parts of the Brahmin
Dharma. In any case these brahmins did not ask a question which could
go beyond their own tradition.
As an alternative to these speculation there is the possibility that
the occasion” (nidāna) for this discourse has nothing to with rich old
brahmins asking an improbable question. Prose Suttas have “occasions” describing when and where they were spoken by the Buddha
and there are a few cases of this in Snp. In the majority of the poetic
Suttas there is no occasion given in the Snp text, but the Snp Commentary provides “occasions”, some of which are more likely than others.
Let us suppose that this “occasion” though included in the Snp text is in
fact a later addition to the verses and provides a story upon which may
be build a strong Buddhist criticism of the brahmins. This supposition
would dissolve away the story of old brahmins asking about their own
Dharma.

2.7 how brahmins lived by the dharma

109

Brahmins, those then past and then present
Verses 287–301 concern how the ancient brahmins lived with their
ideal conduct given in detail. Whether this is looking back upon a
“golden age” of brahmins, or whether it agreed with the facts of history,
is hard to tell, though it is common to all religious traditions that
they begin with a ﬂowering of true spirituality, to be followed over
generations by decline. Verses 287–291 could almost apply to the lives
of good bhikkhus who also are held in honour for their austere and
compassionate practice and so receive gifts from their supporters.
The next verse introduces a particularly brahminical practice, the
long studentship of young celibate brahmins more or less spent with
their teachers. When this period of the Good Life was complete then
brahmins married.
Verse 294 throws light upon brahminical fears of “pollution”, that
is, of degradation from their caste, in this case caused by contact with
menstrual blood. Hindu law books contain many examples of what
leads to being outcasted, such as travelling overseas and partaking food
not cooked by brahmin-caste people, and so on. By contrast, the Buddha emphasized pollution of the mind/emotions. However, verse 295
pictures a Good Life which would be an ornament to anyone whether
in Buddhist monastic robes or within other religious traditions.
There follow two verses strongly advocating the celibate life in a
way that could describe good bhikkhus too. From 298 onwards there
are verses upon “begging”. English does not have a very good word
to translate yācati as understood by Buddhist teachings. A bhikkhu
going on almsround must be silent, unless spoken to, and may not ask
for food generally though allowances are made for sick monks. They
collect in their bowls whatever people are happy to give to them. This
digniﬁed practice diﬀers in many ways from the pictures conjured up
by “begging”.
Verse 298 emphasizes that the original form of brahminical rites
involved no bloodshed and is followed by two verses praising cattle,

110

sutta nipāta

particularly cows, for their beneﬁts to human society. No mention of
course, is made of the so-called beneﬁts of beef! Those brahmins then,
and most of them today, were vegetarians and appreciated the many
products that come from milk. The results of this kindness to cattle
and Dharma-practice generally are listed in 301.
But as is the way in this world, this happy state could not continue.
The causes of brahminical decline are spelt out in the next few verses.
Many of these factors would apply equally to Buddhist monastic degeneration. Just as those brahmins of old greedily stared at the wealth
and luxury of the rajahs’ courts and coveted what they saw, so many
Buddhist monks these days want to enjoy the pleasures advertised in
so many ways in “western” materialistic life.
It is worth our reﬂection upon present times, when so much adharma is practised, and so many new diseases have arisen as dangers for
us now. Could there be causes and eﬀects—past human causes with
painful results for us?
Weapons and killing are clearly stated (315) to be not the way of
Dharma. But if we view our world now—through newspapers, radio,
television and so on—what do we ﬁnd every day: more and more violence. Some of it is dressed up as the lawful control of others who
would bring even worse evils than we have presently. Powerful people,
the present-day representatives of rajahs, speak upon this and are
believed. “Well, they must know, mustn’t they? They must know more
than us!” So the blind follow the blind. What good can ever come from
violence? This is not to recommend paciﬁsm in its extreme forms for
even the famous Buddhist king, Asoka, kept an army, though he did not
use it for oﬀensive warfare after he became a Buddhist. But in general,
violence begets violence, while as Dhammapada 5 reminds us:
Never here by enmity
are those with enmity allayed:
they are allayed by amity—
this is the Natural Law.

2.7 how brahmins lived by the dharma

111

The Sutta closes with two verses upon the destruction of traditional
norms caused by the violence (in this case of the sacriﬁces) in their society. Even if the norms of that society (caste, discrimination and even
persecution of low caste and outcaste people) does not recommend
itself to our understanding of civilization, still it was an established
code of behaviour. But the Buddha, whose essential teaching was (and
is) karmic causation, pointed out and made clear that ritual sacriﬁces
involving violence cannot possibly bring the good results of peace,
good health and wealth. The (violent) causes do not agree with the desired peaceful results. If we desire peace these days, this causation still
applies: peace, happiness and spiritual growth can never be brought
about by more and more dreadful weapons. Evil cannot be put down by
more evil even when this is disguised by the powerful calls of nationalism, destruction of violent foes and our personal safety in future.

2.8

Dharma as a Boat
Nāvā Sutta
As devas do venerate their lord, Indra king,
so likewise to that person from whom one knows Dharma,
respected, clear-minded, and very learned too,
that teacher makes manifest the words of the Dharma. ₃₁₉
This having considered then, the wise person,
while practising Dharma according with Dharma,
becomes learned, intelligent, subtle-minded too,
by diligently dwelling with one who is Such.

₃₂₀

But by following the foolish, inferior fellow,
who’s not found Dharma’s goal, while envious of others,
to death one will come before Dharma knowing,
₃₂₁
not having crossed over (the river of doubts).
Just as a person going into a river
swollen in ﬂood and very swiftly ﬂowing,
would be carried away by the force of the current—
then how can this person help others across?

₃₂₂

So it’s the same with the unpractised person,
who knows not the Dharma as explained by the wise,
sans knowledge profound, not crossed over doubting:
₃₂₃
how could this person cause others to Know?
But one who does on a strong boat embark,
furnished with oars and rudder complete,
as skilled in the means, with wisdom as well,
that one can take so many others across.
Of mind developed deeply, one who Knows truly,
one of great learning, or unshakeable Dharma,

₃₂₄

2.8 dharma as a boat

113

other people can lead who possess the capacity
to listen attentively and penetrate deeply.

₃₂₅

Therefore be sure to frequent a True person,
an intelligent one who is of great learning,
realized in the meaning, practised on the Path,
a Knower of Dharma attained to the Bliss.

₃₂₆

(Snp 319–326)

Commentary on Nāvā Sutta
319: Whether the word viññāṇa in the second line should be translated “knows” (in an intellectual sense) or “Knows” (through
personal experience of Dharma’s truth), one’s Dharma-teacher,
or many Dharma-teachers, should be greatly respected. They
have opened one’s eyes to the treasure of the Dharma, a gift excelling all other gifts. How they should be revered will vary with
diﬀerent cultures, even simple matters of prostration and añjalī
vary greatly, while some traditional marks of reverence may not
be appropriate in “western” lands. Still, these things are not so
important in comparison with heartfelt devotion and helpfulness. Those who truly revere their teachers never create trouble
for them nor do they stir up strife among their disciples.
320: “Practising the Dharma according with Dharma” (dhammānudhammapatipatti) is obviously opposed to the egocentric method
of “practising Dharma according to oneself ”. With the former
since it is Dharma-practice according with the teachings and
principles of Dharma which will advance experience of the Dharma, while with the latter the only result will be to lead away
from Dharma and from one’s teacher’s instructions. The qualities of both the teacher and the pupil are both mentioned in this
verse, and it is obvious that pupils, with diligent practice, will
become like their teacher in virtues and wisdom, eventually to

114

sutta nipāta

become teachers themselves. Awakened teachers are sometimes
referred to as those who are Such (tādi) that is, they have Known
the Dharma as Such (or Thus) and not otherwise.
321: The dangers of not practising with a teacher who is Such but
“following a foolish inferior fellow” are made plain in this verse.
This description of an unworthy teacher and the disadvantages
of being a student under him/her remind us of the verse (Snp
262):
Not consorting with the foolish,
rather with the wise consorting,
honouring the honourable:
this is a supreme good omen.
The river of doubts is the experience of all unenlightened
people. What do they doubt? They think that they know through
blind devotion, intellectual knowledge or by following tradition,
that really they Know but they only believe. “To believe” in fact,
means “not to know” although one may be sure that one’s belief
is pure and correct, even the only doctrine which is true. But as
belief in doctrines, including Buddhist ones, means that these
have not been veriﬁed, there must, somewhere in the back of the
mind, be doubt. The eﬀort to believe, for instance in six improbable things before breakfast, is a rather unskilful way to cover up
doubts. Doubts make for interior conﬂict, while beliefs can lead
to exterior conﬂicts, even to bloodshed, persecution and wars.
What are called religious beliefs in English are included under the Pāli-Sanskrit word diṭṭhi/dṛṣṭi, literally “what has been
seen”, hence the English translation “view”. Right views are
those which accord with Dharma whether in matters of moral
conduct (sīla), meditation (samādhi) or in wisdom (paññā/prajñā).
Dharma in this sense does not equate solely with “Buddhism”.
It is not only Buddhists who are good, kind and generous people

2.8 dharma as a boat

115

and who purify their minds! Wrong views may be minor matters
of belief held in the mind but not disputed with others, or they
may lead to violence, killings, sectarian wars and assassinations.
In general, holding views is a block to spiritual development.
Holding Buddhist views of any kind means one has not seen the
Dharma for oneself. Holding wrong views—and there is a great
variety of them—is destructive of Dharma both within and without. Believing in the Dharma may be a ﬁrst step but it should not
be long adhered to: clinging to the Dharma is just another kind
of clinging (upādāna) and this is certainly not Dharma. Dharma
is to be veriﬁed, not views to be clung to.
322–3: The ﬁrst of these verses presents a striking simile with a question
at its conclusion. So, how can this person help others across these
ﬂoods? The help that they try to give others—to get them across
the ﬂoods of ignorance and craving—could not succeed because
they have not yet experienced “knowledge profound” and so have
not gone to the Further Shore themselves.
Elsewhere too, the Buddha speaks about the situation where
one stuck on this shore of saṁsāra will be unable to extricate
another person in the same plight: “This situation does not occur,
Cunda, that one person sunk in a morass will be able to pull out
another in the same plight” (MN 8), but one who is no longer
stuck will be able to extract another.
The Suttas also speak of three persons: one sunk in quicksands, another with one foot upon dry land, and last the person
with both feet on ﬁrm ground. Only the last one, representing
Buddhas and Awakened masters, is capable of pulling out others from the saṁsāra-morass. The middle person may be able
to give some help as they have some personal experience of the
awakening Dharma, but the ﬁrst person can hardly help others.
Even if one has vowed, as in Mahāyāna traditions, to cross over
all beings to Nirvāṇa, still one must spend many years with good

116

sutta nipāta

masters, learning and practising, before this can be even partly
accomplished.
324: The strong boat is the Dharma. I have been fortunate to know a
number of teachers who may have crossed over in the Dharmavessel and taken many others across. These teachers’ Dharma,
both their instructions and their conduct, was wonderful, the
words and actions of those gone beyond self. They had hundreds or thousands of pupils who revered them as models of
the Dharma manifest in a living person. So of course, they could
“take so many others across”.
In another Sutta (MN 22) the Buddha says:
“I shall show you how Dharma resembles a raft, being for the purpose of crossing over, not for the purpose of grasping. Suppose a traveller saw a great expanse of water, whose near shore was dangerous and
fearful, whose further shore was safe and free from
fear, but there was no ferry or bridge. Then after considering this, he collected grass, twigs, branches and
leaves and bound them together in a raft, supported
by which, and making eﬀorts with his hands and feet,
he got safely across. Then when he had got across, he
thought ‘This raft has been very helpful to me, since by
its means I got safely across; suppose that I hoist it on
my head or load it on my shoulders and go wherever I
want?’ What do you think, bhikkhus, would that man,
acting thus, be doing what should be done with a raft?”
“No, Lord.”
“What should he do with it then? lf when he got
across, he thought, ‘This raft has been very helpful
to me since by its means I got safely across; suppose
I haul it up on dry land or set it adrift on the water
and go where I want to go?’ That is how he should do

2.8 dharma as a boat

117

what should be done with a raft. So I have shown you
how the Dharma resembles a raft, being for the purpose of crossing over, not for the purpose of grasping.
When you Know Dharma resembling a raft, then even
Dharma should be abandoned, what to speak of nonDharma.”²
The strong boat of Dharma can also be a vast vessel, as in a
Mahāyāna sutra:
What then again is the vessel leading to Bodhi?
Standing upon it one guides all beings to Nirvāṇa.
Great is that vessel, immense,
vast like the vastness of space
Those who travel upon it are carried
to safety, delight and to ease.
So going across the ocean, lake, river, ﬂoods, has been taught
in many ways by the Buddha according to the persons being
addressed.
325: “Unshakeable Dharma” is only found in those who Know and See.
They are not unshakeable because of obstinacy, or from attachment to views, dogmas or to their own ideas. No force of any kind
can shake their Knowing and Seeing the truth of the Dharma.
They are unshakeable, as the traditional Pāli Commentary remarks, by any or all of the eight Worldly Dharmas: gain and loss,
honour, dishonour, blame, praise, happiness, dissatisfaction (=
dukkha). See also Commentary on Snp 2.4.
326: “Attained to the Bliss”. Sukha in this book is usually translated
“happiness” but the sukha referred to here is that of realization
of Dharma beyond all views.
² Sujato: klm here had “even Dhamma-teaching should be abandoned”, but surely
he did not mean to say that the teaching of Dhamma should be abandoned. I think
it is clearer as is.

2.9

What is Good Conduct?
Kiṁsīla Sutta

sāriputta With what kinds of conduct and morality,

growing in what sorts of karmas,
will a person well-established be
for attainment of the highest goal?
buddha

₃₂₇

Let that one be an honourer of elders, never envious,
a knower of the right time for the teacher seeing,
and when Dharma’s being taught, a knower of that time
₃₂₈
to listen precisely to those well-spoken words.
And at the right time go to the teacher’s presence
in an unassuming way, discarding obstinacy,
with restraint and recollection of the way to practise,
₃₂₉
remembering the Dharma for the life of purity.
Dwelling in the Dharma, delighted in Dharma,
in Dharma established, and skilled in deciding Dharma,
never uttering words to the Dharma’s detriment,
₃₃₀
Let such a one be guided by well-spoken truths.
Disputatiousness, gossip, complaints and ill-will,
deception, hypocrisy, longing and pride,
aggressiveness, harshness, deﬁlements-attached,
fare abandoning these, pride-free, of steady mind.

₃₃₁

Understanding’s the essence of well-spoken words,
while that and the learnt is the essence of calmness;
but wisdom and learning in one do not grow—
that person who’s hasty and negligent both.

₃₃₂

Delighting in Dharma by Noble Ones taught,
their mind, speech and body all unsurpassed—

2.9 what is good conduct?

119

in gentleness, peace, meditative-states ﬁrm,
attained to the essence of wisdom and learning.

₃₃₃

(Snp 327–333)

2.10

Wake up! Make an Eﬀort!
Uṭṭhāna Sutta
Get up and sit!
What need of sleep!
For the sick what rest is there,
pierced by the dart of pain?

₃₃₄

Get up and sit!
Train hard for peace.
Let not Māra know
that you are negligent,
deluded and under his control.

₃₃₅

Cross beyond this craving—
tied to, desiring which
gods and men remain.
Don’t let this chance pass by:
those who do so grieve,
sending themselves to hell!

₃₃₆

From “dust” arises negligence,
from negligence to more:
by diligence and knowledge,
pluck out the dart oneself.

₃₃₇
(Snp 334–337)

A pithy comment
How long has one to live? Does an end, the old end of death, come today,
tomorrow, a few weeks or months away? And here we are lying down
for hours and hours. Do we sleep so long because life is so painful—too
much dukkha. And when we reach bodily suﬀerings even the escape of
sleep and drowsiness may be no longer available.

2.10 wake up! make an effort!

121

“Get up and sit”, means “do it while you can!” The obvious pleasures
do not last for long and a time will come when even comforts no longer
manifest. Life isn’t nice for long. Even if you think of eighty years as
long, think even that one hundred years passes soon and what will
come after?
Our own Māras—our temptations and conﬂicts—strengthen the
lazier we become. Māra is just a picturesque name for mental deﬁlements. No Māra is “out there” to increase our dukkha—Māras are our
own burdens. No need to be under Māra’s control—or to be under the
dominion of the daughters of Māra! So don’t use Māra as an excuse of
one’s own weakness or failings.
Craving may be pleasant, evenly divinely pleasant for so are the
devas attached to their delights and burdened by them. Divine attachments must seem superior to the joys of humanity but deva-happiness
does not equate to liberation. In fact, tangling oneself with innumerable pleasures—where one can do this as a human—could lead as a
result of that karma to a painful future. “Sending themselves to hell”:
no one else sends them there.
“Dust” accumulates in the house from not cleaning it, similarly
does dust in the mind, which does however need moment by moment
diligence to keep the dust away. Or perhaps a dart, rather than dust,
will illustrate how painful is the accumulation of dirt. But it is all
impermanent. Who has ever heard of permanent dirt? Though this is
true, one still has to open an eye and see what is to be seen. So,
get up!

2.11

Teaching Rāhula
Rāhula Sutta

buddha

rāhula

buddha

From living together constantly,
the Teacher you don’t scorn?
Torch-bearer to humanity,
is he by you revered?

₃₃₈

From living together constantly,
the Teacher I scorn not.
Torch-bearer to humanity
is by me revered.

₃₃₉

Having let go ﬁve sense-desires,
and forms that are dear, delighting mind,
with faith renounce the household life,
be one who dukkha ends.

₃₄₀

Keep company with noble friends,
dwell in a lonely practice-place,
secluded, having little noise,
with food be moderate.

₃₄₁

Robes as well as food from alms,
with shelter, also remedies—
for these things no craving form,
so turn not to the world again.

₃₄₂

By Pāṭimokkha stay restrained
and by the ﬁve sense faculties,
practise bodily mindfulness
to be dispassionate.

₃₄₃

Avoid those objects beautiful,
which may be linked with lust,

2.11 teaching rāhula

123

on the unlovely, one-pointed,
well-concentrated, grow the mind.

₃₄₄

Develop then the signless state,
with tendency to pride let go—
by fully understanding it,
truly as peaceful you will fare.

₃₄₅

In this way the Radiant One with these verses frequently exhorted
the venerable Rāhula.
(Snp 338–345)

A note upon Rāhula Sutta
This contains very ordinary Dharma advice for bhikkhus and the only
unusual feature is found in verse 338. This raises the question of why
the Buddha asks his son, Rāhula, if he scorns him. Of course this happens often enough in household life, and could also occur in monastic
communities. Having asked this, the Buddha continues with words
praising himself. Somewhat odd! Perhaps, though this is a speculation,
the ﬁrst two verses are later additions for they ring rather hollow.

2.12

Vaṅgīsa’s Questions, Buddha’s Answer
Vaṅgīsa Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Lord dwelt at Āḷāvī, at the Aggāḷava Shrine. Not long
before, the venerable Vaṅgīsa’s preceptor, by name the elder Nigrodhakappa, had become completely Cool at the Aggāḷava Shrine. Then in
Vaṅgīsa’s mind, being at one and in solitude, arose this thought: “Has
my preceptor become completely Cool or has he not?”
Later in the day Vaṅgīsa left his solitude and went to the Lord
and having drawn near him, paid his respects and sat to one side.
While sitting there Vaṅgīsa said this to the Lord: “While I was sitting in
meditation this thought arose in my mind: ‘Has my preceptor become
completely Cool or has he not?’”
Vaṅgīsa then arose from his seat, placed his upper robe over one
shoulder and, lotussing his hands respectfully, addressed the Lord
with these verses.
vaṅgīsa

We ask now the Teacher of wisdom supreme—
who’s cut oﬀ all doubts in this very life,³
that Aggāḷava bhikkhu who died recently,
famous, well-known, was he truly Cool-become?

₃₄₆

His name Nigrodhakappa was,
to that brahmin given by the Radiant One,
he went around revering you, and, strenuous
seeking Liberation, O Seer of the Secure.

₃₄₇

O Sakya, All-Seeing, we all wish to know
concerning this hearkener, Kappa by name,
all of our ears are ready to hear—
the Teacher you are, the One unsurpassed.

₃₄₈

³ Sujato: lkm had “who’s inseen the Dhamma”, which is incorrect.

2.12 vaṅgīsa’s questions
Sever our doubt and tell me of this:
that he knew complete Cool, O Wisdom Profound:
tell this in our midst, O All-Seeing One,
as thousand-eyed Sakka by devas ringed.

125

₃₄₉

Whatever here deluded paths bring on the bondages,
on ignorance’s side, the bases for all doubts,
on reaching the Tathāgatha they cease to be,
₃₅₀
for certainly his Eye is supreme among men.
If never, no one, could deﬁlements disperse,
as forceful wind a piled-up mass of clouds,
enshrouded would be, for sure, the whole world,
and even the illustrious would have no chance to shine. ₃₅₁
But the Wise in this world are the makers of light
and you, a Wise One, are such I conceive,
we have come upon Him who Knows and who Sees—
₃₅₂
to those here assembled, Kappa clearly reveal.
Swiftly send forth fair speech, O Fairest One,
as swan (its neck) stretches sounding softly forth;
with your melodious voice so well-modulated
to it we listen, all of us, attentively.

₃₅₃

Remainderless, you’ve let go of birth and death—
I’ll urge the One who’s Cleansed to Dharma teach;
ordinary persons cannot act out their desires,
but with discrimination Tathāgatas act.

₃₅₄

(Your) expositions (of Dharma) so thoroughly based
on straightforward wisdom then thoroughly grasped;
(and he) last lotussed his hands with greatest respect:
₃₅₅
so do not delude us, You of wisdom supreme.

126

sutta nipāta
Having known the Dharma noble, the basics and reﬁned,
You the Energetic One who Knows, do not delude.
I long for your words as for water one does
in summer season by heat overcome.
₃₅₆
Rain down on our ears!
That purpose for which Kappāyana led
the life of purity—surely it wasn’t in vain;
did he become Cool or did residues remain—
tell of his Freedom, that we long to hear.

₃₅₇

buddha

Craving he cut for mind and body both—
craving’s stream that long had lain within him;
completely he has crossed beyond all birth and death—
₃₅₈
So the Blessed One spoke, the Fore before the Five.

vaṅgīsa

Hearing your word, O Seventh of Seers,
I’m both pleased and truly satisﬁed.
Truly my question’s not in vain—
that brahmin did elude me not!

₃₅₉

As he spoke, he acted so,
one of the Buddha’s hearkeners
who rent the deceiver Māra’s net,
spread wide and very strong.

₃₆₀

Lord, Kappa the capable
saw graspings’, clingings’ source;
Kappāyana has gone beyond
death’s realm so hard to cross.

₃₆₁
(Snp 346–361)

2.13

Perfection in the Wandering Life
Sammāparibbājaniya Sutta

question

buddha

Of the Sage of great wisdom, one gone across,
to the further shore gone, completely Cool, poised
who’s renounced a house,
sense-pleasures dispelled, I ask:
How would a bhikkhu rightly wander in the world?

₃₆₂

Who has destroyed (belief ) in omens, in luck,
the occurrence of dreams and other signs such,
who is rid of the bane of what is auspicious,
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₆₃

Who sensuality is able to divert—
both varieties, human and divine—such a bhikkhu
passed beyond being, knowing Dharma well,
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₆₄

Anger and avarice by the bhikkhu abandoned,
his back having turned upon slander as well,
compliance, opposition, completely disappeared,
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₆₅

Letting go the pleasant, what’s unpleasant too,
ungrasping, unsupported by nothing at all,
from all the causes for the fetters—completely free,
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₆₆

Seeing no essence in mental substrata,
dispelled passionate desire for what can be grasped,
not being dependent or led by another,
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₆₇

128

sutta nipāta
In speech, mind and deed to others unopposed
and knowing very well the Dharma’s full extent,
and one who is aspiring to the state of Nirvāṇa,
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₆₈

The bhikkhu not conceited thinking, “Me he reveres”,
nor on being abused does he retaliate,
nor thrilled with others donations of food,
₃₆₉
such a one rightly would wander in the world.
For greed and for being, the bhikkhu’s let go,
as for injury and bondage it’s not done by him
crossed over doubts, removed is the dart,
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₇₀

A bhikkhu who knows what he himself enjoys
would not be one who harms others in the world;
realizing the Dharma as it really is,
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₇₁

in whom are no hidden tendencies at all—
the roots of evil completely removed,
for them no longings left, no yearnings come anew
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₇₂

Inﬂows eradicated and conceit let go
and transcended the path of sexual desire,
one tamed, completely Cool and imperturbable,
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₇₃

Conﬁdent and learned, one who Sees the Way,
one Wise who among sects is no sectarian;
who greed has diverted, hatred, ill-will too,
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₇₄

2.13 perfection in the wandering life

129

A conqueror—purity perfected, remover of the veil,
with majesty of dharmas, far-shorer, inturbulent,
skilful with knowledge of conditioned things’ cessation,
₃₇₅
such a one rightly would wander in the world.
Of wisdom puriﬁed surmounting both
past and the future, gone beyond time,
and in every way free from sense-bases,
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₇₆

Final Knowledge of the State, having realized the Dharma,
having seen openly the letting-go of inﬂows,
with all the substrata completely dissolved,
₃₇₇
such a one rightly would wander in the world.
question

Indeed, O Blessed One, certainly it is thus,
for that bhikkhu tamed, living like this—
one who beyond all the fetters has passed,
such a one rightly would wander in the world.

₃₇₈

(Snp 362–378)

2.14

To Dhammika: the Pure Hearkeners’ Conduct
Dhammika Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Lord dwelt at Sāvatthī, in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. There the upāsaka Dhammika accompanied by ﬁve hundred
upasakas went up to the Radiant One and sat to one side. Having done
so and saluted the Radiant One, the upasaka Dhammika addressed him
with verses.
dhammika I ask of Gotama—one profoundly wise:

Behaving in which way a hearkener is good—
whether from home to homelessness gone
or upasakas living the householder’s life.

₃₇₉

The birthplaces of this world together with devas
and ﬁnal Release, you clearly understand,
none compare with you in seeing this profundity
for, as they say, you are Buddha supreme.

₃₈₀

All knowledge is yours, you have perfectly revealed
Dharma, out of your compassion for beings all,
remover of the veil, one with the All-round Eye
and stainless do you illuminate the world.

₃₈₁

Then came to your presence a nāga renowned,
Erāvaṇa by name, having heard you were a conqueror,
he had secluded talk with you and then attained—
₃₈₂
“Sādhu” he exclaimed, and departed, pleased.
Then were there kings, Vessavaṇa, Kuvera,
who came to ask questions on Dharma from you,
so you, O Wise One, being asked then replied,
and they being pleased departed from there.

₃₈₃

2.14 to dhammika

131

These theorist sectarians used to dispute—
Ājīvakas and Nigaṇṭhas, all of that kind—
unable in wisdom they go not beyond you,
as a man standing still passes not one running swiftly.⁴ ₃₈₄

buddha

Then there are Brahmins who’re used to dispute—
even old Brahmins are found among them;
or other disputants proud of themselves:
all, for the meaning, depend on you.

₃₈₅

This Dharma indeed is blissful, profound,
by you well-proclaimed, O Radiant One,
so wishing to listen are all of us here,
now when we asked, speak to us, Buddha the best.

₃₈₆

So let all these bhikkhus well-seated here,
upāsakas too, who likewise wish to listen,
listen to the dharma by the stainless won,
as devas to Vāsava’s well-spoken words.

₃₈₇

Listen, O bhikkhus, I give you chance to hear—
to the Dharma that’s strict—all of you remember it,
let the intelligent seeing the beneﬁt
practise the deportment of one who’s left home.

₃₈₈

A bhikkhu in the times proscribed should wander not
but seek for alms timely going round a town;
who goes at times proscribed, temptations do tempt,
₃₈₉
so the awakened go not within the wrong time.
Sights with sounds and tastes, smells and touches too—
all these with which beings are completely drunk,
for all of these dharmas let go desire,
₃₉₀
and at the right time walk for the morning meal.
⁴ Sujato: I completed the translation of this line.

132

sutta nipāta
A bhikkhu with timely almsfood gained
returns by himself, then seated alone,
contemplative within, not distracted without,
not externalizing, since oneself ’s restrained.

₃₉₁

Should he with other hearkeners converse,
with bhikkhus, or anyone else at all,
of the Dharma let him speak reﬁned,
not utter slander or another’s blame.

₃₉₂

Some, disputatious, oﬀer warfare with words,
but we do not praise them, those of little wit,
bound by attachment to talking this and that,
so certainly they send their minds far away.

₃₉₃

The truly wise disciple having listened to the Dharma
pointed out by the Well-farer, should carefully use
food-oﬀerings, a sitting and a sleeping place,
₃₉₄
with water for washing the principal robes.
Let a bhikkhu, therefore, with almsfood and hut
for sitting and sleeping, for his robes washing,
be unsullied, quite unattached,
as water-drop spreads not upon a lotus-leaf.

₃₉₅

Now I shall tell you the household’s rule,
by practising which one’s a good hearkener,
for by one with possessions it cannot be got—
that dharma complete by a bhikkhu attained.

₃₉₆

Kill not any beings nor cause them to be killed,
and do not approve of them having been killed,
put by the rod for all that lives—
whether they are weak, or strong in the world.

₃₉₇

2.14 to dhammika

133

What is “ungiven”—anything, anywhere,
that’s known to be others’, its theft one should avoid.
Neither order things taken,
nor others’ removal approve—
₃₉₈
all of this “ungiven” let the hearkener avoid.
Let the intelligent person live a celibate life,
as one would avoid a pit of glowing coals;
but being unable to live the celibate life,
go not beyond the bounds with others’ partners.

₃₉₉

In government assembly, or artisans’ guild,
or one to another, speak not what is false,
not others compel, nor approve of their lies,
all kinds of untruthfulness you should avoid.

₄₀₀

Whatever householder this Dharma approves,
in maddening drink should never indulge,
nor make others drink, nor approve if they do,
knowing it leads to a mind that’s disturbed.

₄₀₁

Fools do many evils because they are drunk,
while causing other people to be negligent.
This basis of demerit should be avoided,
but fools are delighted, confused with mind upset.

₄₀₂

Kill not any being, what’s not given do not take,
neither be a liar nor addicted to drink,
and, let go of sex and the non-celibate life,
in the “wrong-time” for food, eat not in the night.

₄₀₃

Neither necklaces display nor perfumes employ,
use the ground as a bed or sleep upon a mat:
these are the uposatha eight-factored vows
made known by the Buddha gone to dukkha’s end.

₄₀₄

134

sutta nipāta
With devotion at heart the uposathas kept,
completely perfected in its eight parts,
on the fourteenth, the ﬁfteenth, and the eighth days,
₄₀₅
as well the days special in the moon’s half months.
Let that one intelligent with devoted heart,
having kept uposatha, early next morning,
distribute food and drink—whatever’s suitable—
to the bhikkhusaṅgha, rejoicing in this act.

₄₀₆

Support mother and father according to Dharma,
do business as merchant to honesty adhering,
diligently practising this householder’s rule—
then to the self-radiant devas one will arrive.

₄₀₇

(Snp 379–407)

chapter 3

The Great Chapter
3.1

The Leaving Home of Gotama
Pabbajjā Sutta

narrator Now I’ll tell of the Leaving Home,

how he, the mighty seer, went forth,
how he was questioned and described
the reason for his Leaving Home.

₄₀₈

The crowded life lived in a house
exhales an atmosphere of dust:
but leaving home is open wide—
seeing this, he chose Leaving Home.¹

₄₀₉

By doing so did he reject
all bodily evil acts,
rejected too, wrong ways of speech,
his livelihood he puriﬁed.

₄₁₀

He went to Rājagaha town,
hill-guarded fort of Magadhans;
¹ Sujato: lkm had “this he saw; chose Leaving Home”.

136

sutta nipāta
there he, the Buddha, walked for alms,
with many a mark of excellence.

₄₁₁

King Bimbisāra from within
his palace saw him passing by,
and when he saw such excellence
in all his marks,

₄₁₂

bimbisāra “Look, sirs”, he said,

How stately is that man, handsome,
how pure, how perfect is his gait;
with eyes downcast, mindful, he looks
only a plough-yoke’s length ahead.

₄₁₃

He’s surely not of humble birth!
Send forth royal messengers at once
upon the path the bhikkhu takes.”

₄₁₄

messenger The messengers were sent at once

and followed closely in his wake:
“Now which way will the bhikkhu go?
Where has he chosen his abode?

₄₁₅

He wanders on from house to house
guarding sense-doors with real restraint.
Fully aware and mindfully,
his alms bowl soon was full.

₄₁₆

His almsround is now done. The Sage
is setting out and leaving town,
taking the road to Paṇḍava—
he must be living on its hill.”

₄₁₇

narrator Now when he came to his abode

the messengers went up to him;

3.1 the leaving home of gotama
though one of them turned back again
to give the King reply:

137

₄₁₈

messenger The bhikkhu, sire, is like a lion,

or like a tiger, like a bull
and seated in a mountain-cave
on the eastern slope of Paṇḍava!

₄₁₉

narrator The Warrior hears the runner’s tale,

then summoning up a coach of state,
he drove in haste from out the town,
out to the hill of Paṇḍava.

₄₂₀

He drove as far as he could go,
and then descended from the coach;
the little distance that remained,
he went on foot, drew near the Sage.

₄₂₁

The King sat down, and he exchanged
greetings, and asked about his health.
When this exchange of courtesy was done,
the king then spoke to him these words:

₄₂₂

bimbisāra You are indeed quite young,

buddha

a youth, a man in life’s ﬁrst phase,
you have the good looks of a man
of high-born warrior-noble stock,

₄₂₃

one ﬁt to grace a ﬁrst-rate force,
to lead the troops of elephants,
wealth can I give you to enjoy;
please tell me of your birth.

₄₂₄

Straight over there, O king,
the Himalayas can be seen,

138

sutta nipāta
there, with wealth and energy,
living among the Kosalans

₄₂₅

are the Ādicca of solar race,²
in that, the clan of Sakyas.
From that family I’ve left home
not desiring pleasures of sense.

₄₂₆

Having seen dangers in sense-desires,
renunciation seen as secure,
I shall go on to strive
for there does my mind delight

₄₂₇
(Snp 408–427)

² Sujato: Indian royal histories speak of a “lunar” and a “solar” lineage. The Buddha’s
clan is believed to be descended from King Okkāka (Skt: Ikṣvāku) of the solar race.
In Snp, Okkāka is mentioned in verses 305, 309, and 998.

3.2

The Striving of Gotama
Padhāna Sutta

buddha

māra

As I strove to subdue myself
beside the broad Nerañjarā,
absorbed unﬂinchingly to gain
the surcease of bondage here,
Namucī came and spoke to me
with words all garbed in pity thus:

₄₂₈

O you are thin and you are pale,
and you are in death’s presence too:

₄₂₉

a thousand parts are pledged to death
but life still holds one part of you.
Live, sir! Life’s the better way;
you may gain merit if you live,

₄₃₀

come live the life of purity, pour
libations on the holy ﬁres
and thus a world of merit gain.
What can you do by struggling now?

₄₃₁

The path of struggling too is rough,
and diﬃcult and hard to bear.
narrator Now Māra, as he spoke these lines

drew near until he stood close by.

₄₃₂

The Blessed One replied to him
as he stood thus:
buddha

O Evil One,
O Cousin of the Negligent,
you have come here for your own ends.

₄₃₃

140

sutta nipāta
Now, merit I need not at all.
Let Māra talk of merit then,
to those that stand in need of it.

₄₃₄

For I have faith and energy,
and I have understanding, too.
So while I thus subdue myself,
why do you speak to me of life?

₄₃₅

There is this wind that blows, can dry
even the rivers’ running streams;
so while I thus subdue myself,
why should it not dry up my blood?

₄₃₆

And, as the blood dries up, then bile
and phlegm run dry, the wasting ﬂesh
becalms the mind: I shall have more
of mindfulness and wisdom too,
I shall have greater concentration.

₄₃₇

For living thus I come to know
the limits to which feeling goes.
My mind looks not to sense-desires:
Now see a being’s purity.

₄₃₈

Your squadron’s ﬁrst is Sense-desires
your second’s Sexual Discontent,
Hunger and Thirst compose the third,
and Craving is the fourth in rank,

₄₃₉

the ﬁfth is Sloth and Accidy,
while Fear is called the sixth in line,
Sceptical doubt is seventh, the eighth
is Sliminess, Hardheartedness;

₄₄₀

3.2 the striving of gotama

141

Gain with Honour, Praise besides,
and ill-won Notoriety,
Self-praise and Denigrating others—

₄₄₁

These are your squadrons, Namucī,
the Black One’s ﬁghting troops.
None but the brave will conquer them
to gain bliss by the victory.

₄₄₂

As though I’m weaving muñja-grass,
proclaiming no retreat: shame upon life
defeated here—better to die in battle now
than choose to live on in defeat.

₄₄₃

Ascetics and brahmins there are found
that have surrendered here, and they
are seen no more: they do not know
the paths the pilgrim travels by.

₄₄₄

So, seeing Māra’s squadrons now
arrayed all round, with elephants,
I sally forth to ﬁght, that I
may not be driven from my post.

₄₄₅

Your serried squadrons, which the world
with all its gods cannot defeat,
Now I’ll break with wisdom sharp,
as with a stone a raw clay pot.

₄₄₆

With all mind’s thoughts within the range,
with well-established mindfulness,
I’ll travel on from state to state
many disciples leading out.

₄₄₇

142

māra

sutta nipāta
They, both diligent and resolute
carry on my Sāsana,
and though you like it not, they’ll go
to where they do not grieve.

₄₄₈

Though step by step for seven years
I’ve followed on the Blessed One,
the Fully Enlightened One, possessed
of mindfulness, he gave to me no chance.

₄₄₉

A crow there was who walked around
a stone that seemed a lump of fat;
“Shall I ﬁnd something soft in this?
And is there something tasty here?”

₄₅₀

He ﬁnding nothing tasty there,
made oﬀ: and we from Gotama
depart in disappointment, too,
like to the crow that tried the stone.

₄₅₁

narrator Then full of sorrow he let slip

the lute from underneath his arm,
then that dejected demon
disappeared just there.

₄₅₂
(Snp 428–452)

3.3

The Well-spoken
Subhāsita Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Radiant One dwelt at Sāvatthī, in the Jeta Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. The Radiant One spoke thus: “Bhikkhus”.
“Venerable Sir”, those bhikkhus replied.
“Speech having four qualities is well-spoken, not ill-spoken, and
blameless, not blameworthy, among the wise. What four? Here, bhikkhus,
a bhikkhu speaks only what is well-spoken, not what is ill-spoken;
what is Dharma, not what is not-Dharma; what is kindly, not what is
unkind; what is the truth, not what is false. This speech is well-spoken,
not ill-spoken, and blameless, not blameworthy among the wise.”
This is what the Radiant One said, then he spoke further.
Now peaceful Ones say: ﬁrst speak the well-spoken,
and second, speak Dharma but not its opposite,
what’s kind do speak, third, not the unkind,
while fourth, speak the truth but never the false.

₄₅₃

Then the venerable Vaṅgīsa rose with robe over one shoulder and
lotussed hands towards the Radiant One saying to him: “Sir, it has
come to me!”
“Let it come to you, Vaṅgīsa.”
The venerable Vaṅgīsa then praised the Radiant One in his presence
with these appropriate verses:
Only that speech should be spoken
from which harm does not come to oneself,
nor torment brings upon others—
this truly is speech that’s well-spoken.
Speak only those words that are kind,
the speech that is gladly received,

₄₅₄

144

sutta nipāta
so whatever one speaks to others,
conveying no evil, is kind.

₄₅₅

Truth indeed, is deathless speech—
this is the ancient Dharma.
On truth, its study and practice both,
they say are the Peaceful ﬁrm.

₄₅₆

Whatever words the Buddha speaks,
Nirvāṇa’s safety to attain,
bringing dukkha to an end,
such words they are the worthiest.

₄₅₇
(Snp 453–457)

Notes
This small Sutta is important for Dharma-practice. It is easier to make
unwholesome karma by way of the mouth than it is through bodily
action—words just slip oﬀ the tongue so easily. Think how many words
one speaks every day! So the Buddha here deﬁnes what is subhāsita,
well-spoken. He does this twice, ﬁrst in prose and then in a summary
verse, a mnemonic aid in a world where teachings were not recorded
even by writing.
To ensure that this teaching stuck in the mind, Venerable Vaṅgīsa,
famous for his ability to speak inspired and spontaneous verse, then,
with the Buddha’s approval, elaborates upon these four types of good
speech. This occasion does not bring forth his best verses.
This Sutta also occurs in SN 8.5 (Vaṅgīsa-saṁyutta) though there it
has no occasion, nor the Buddha’s prose and verse.
Verse 456 mentions “the ancient Dharma”. The word translated here
as “ancient” is sanantano which pts Dictionary deﬁnes as “primeval,
of old, for ever, eternal”. When used as an adjective with dharma, the
meaning is that this Dharma is true:

3.3 the well-spoken

145

“Whether Tathāgatas (or Buddhas) arise or Tathāgatas
do not arise, there is this state of causality that always
exists, this established order of dharmas, this natural lawfulness of Dharma, that is to say: All conditioned things
are impermanent … all conditioned things are dukkha …
all dharmas are not-self … ”
This is the ancient Dharma true of all worlds, of all beings, at all
times, whether or not it is known to these beings. For the above quotation see AN 3.134.
The Hindu understanding of the Sanskrit sanatana-dharma emphasizes time—that this Dharma is eternal and includes among other
matters the society ordered into castes. This view is defended in the
Bhagavad-gīta.

3.4

To Sundarika-Bhāradvāja on Oﬀerings
Sundarika-Bhāradvāja Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Radiant One was dwelling among the Kosalans.
At that time the brahmin Sundarika-Bhāradvāja performed on the
bank of the Sundarika river the ﬁre sacriﬁce and oﬀered the ﬁre-ritual.
Having completed the sacriﬁce and ritual the brahmin rose from his
seat and surveyed the four directions, thinking, “Who will partake of
the remains of this sacriﬁce?” It happened then that the brahmin saw
the Radiant One seated at the foot of a tree not far away, but with his
head covered. Seeing him, the brahmin grasped the sacriﬁcial remains
in his left hand and a water-vessel in his right and approached the
Radiant One who, hearing his approach, uncovered his head. Then the
brahmin thought:
“This venerable one is shaven-headed, a mere shaveling” and desired
to turn back. But it occurred to him: “Though shaven-headed there are
some brahmins here like this. It would be good to inquire about his
‘birth’.” Then Sundarika-Bhāradvāja the brahmin approached the Radiant One and having done so, said this: “Of what ‘birth’ is the venerable
one?” Then the Radiant One addressed these verses to the brahmin:
buddha

No brahmin am I, nor son of royalty,
nor of merchant stock, nor any other (caste),
for I know very well ordinary people’s line
so wisely, having nothing, I fare through the world.

₄₅₈

My robe is my dwelling, I live in no house,
My head is shaven, I am fully quenched;
Not clinging to any students here,
It is not appropriate, brahmin, to ask me of my clan.

₄₅₉

sundarika But brahmins, sir, of brahmins always ask

“Are you as well a brahmin, friend?”

₄₆₀

buddha

3.4 to sundarika-bhāradvāja

147

If you say you brahmin are, but call me none,
then of you I ask the chant of Sāvitrī,
consisting of three lines
in four and twenty syllables.

₄₆₁

sundarika On what do they rely, these seers,

buddha

born human, the nobles and brahmins, all of them,
that to the devas they sacriﬁces make
to bring about results here in this world?

₄₆₂

One gone to the End, one who’s gone to Knowledge,
at the time of sacriﬁce receives that oﬀering,
and that will be a blessing, I say.

₄₆₃

sundarika Then for sure will be fruitful this my sacriﬁce,

buddha

because we have seen one such as yourself—
one gone to Knowledge, for if seeing not,
another would have eaten the sacriﬁcial cake.

₄₆₄

Well then, brahmin, you should ask,
since you have come to seek the meaning.
Perhaps you will ﬁnd here a Wise One,
Peaceful, clear, unsoiled, desireless.

₄₆₅

sundarika I do delight in an desire to sacriﬁce, O Gotama,

but I do not know how, instruct me please, sir,
and how a sacriﬁce succeeds, do tell me of that?
buddha

₄₆₆

If that is so, O brahmin, lend your ears,
and in the Dharma I shall instruct you.
Ask not of “birth” but of behaviour enquire—
truly from sticks of wood the sacred ﬁre is born,
so though of lowly line, a sage becomes a thoroughbred,
₄₆₇
one both resolute, and restrained by self-respect,

148

sutta nipāta
tamed by Truth, endowed with self-restraint,
one gone to Knowledge’s end and the Good Life living:
a timely oﬀering one should give to such—
a brahmin seeking merit to such a one should sacriﬁce. ₄₆₈
Let go of sensuality, and homeless faring—those
with minds well-restrained and as a shuttle straight
a timely oﬀering one should give to such—
a brahmin seeking merit to such a one should sacriﬁce. ₄₆₉
Free from lustfulness, sense-faculties controlled,
as the moon freed from old Rāhu’s grasp:
a timely oﬀering one should give to such—
a brahmin seeking merit to such a one should sacriﬁce. ₄₇₀
They who wander the world completely unattached
ever-mindful of mine-making, always letting go:
a timely oﬀering one should give to such—
a brahmin seeking merit to such a one should sacriﬁce. ₄₇₁
Whoever fares victorious, let go of sensuality,
who is a Knower of the end of birth and death,
become quite Cool as a cool-water lake;
such Tathāgata’s worthy of sacriﬁcial cake.

₄₇₂

Who’s equal with equals, unequals far away,
a Tathāgata—of wisdom inﬁnite,
one who is unsmeared either here or hereafter:
such Tathāgata’s worthy of sacriﬁcial cake.

₄₇₃

In whom does not dwell deceit or conceit,
who’s greed-free, unselﬁsh, having no desire,
who anger has lost, exceeding Cool of self,
that Brahmin who’s removed impurity of grief:
such a Tathāgata’s worthy of sacriﬁcial cake.

₄₇₄

3.4 to sundarika-bhāradvāja

149

Whoever has removed the dwellings of the mind,
in whom there exists no clinging any more,
no grasping at anything here or hereafter:
such Tathāgata’s worthy of sacriﬁcial cake.

₄₇₅

With a mind composed and crossed the ﬂood,
a Knower of Dharma by the highest vision,
cleansed of pollutions, bearer of a last body:
such Tathāgata’s worthy of sacriﬁcial cake.

₄₇₆

No pollutions for existence, neither harsh words,
not smouldering are they, to non-existence gone,
one gone to Knowledge, completely released:
such Tathāgata’s worthy of sacriﬁcial cake.

₄₇₇

One gone beyond ties, no ties still exist,
among conceited men, one of no conceit,
comprehending dukkha with its range and base:
such Tathāgata’s worthy of sacriﬁcial cake.

₄₇₈

A seer of solitude and not depending on desire,
escaped from the views by other people known,
in whom are no conditions found at all:
such Tathāgata’s worthy of sacriﬁcial cake.

₄₇₉

Who’s understood completely the dharmas high and low,
not smouldering are they, to non-existence gone,
by clinging’s exhaustion freed and so at peace:
₄₈₀
such Tathāgata’s worthy of sacriﬁcial cake.
Who’s a seer of exhaustion of birth and fetters all
and who has dispelled the sensual trail complete—
puriﬁed, faultless, untainted and ﬂawless:
such Tathāgata’s worthy of sacriﬁcial cake.

₄₈₁

150

sutta nipāta
One not seeing self by means of self within,
ﬁrm and straightforward as well contemplative,
free from lust, harsh-heartedness and from all doubts:
₄₈₂
such Tathāgata’s worthy of sacriﬁcial cake.
In whom no conditions for delusion can be found,
a seer with wisdom among all the dharmas,
one who’s the bearer of the ultimate body,
attained to the blissful unexcelled Awakening
to this extent there s purity among the powerful:
such Tathāgata’s worthy of sacriﬁcial cake.

₄₈₃

sundarika In the past I sacriﬁced, now let my sacriﬁce be true,

for now I have met such a one of wisdom’s qualities;
you’re Brahmā manifest indeed, accept from me O Radiant,
₄₈₄
may the Radiant One eat my sacriﬁcial cake.
buddha

Chanting sacred verses for comestibles—
that’s not done by me,
for those who rightly see, brahmin,
it accords not with Dharma.
Chanting sacred verses thus
is rejected by the Buddhas,
such is the Dharma, brahmin,
such is their practice.

₄₈₅

A Great Seer with Final Knowledge, conﬂicts stilled,
one who has exhausted taints, is wholly free—
make oﬀerings of food and drink to such a one:
the certain ﬁeld for one who merit seeks.

₄₈₆

sundarika Good indeed, sir, that I should know of this.

But having gained your teachings (now I ask):
Who should eat the gift of such as I,
whom I’m seeking at this time of sacriﬁce?

₄₈₇

3.4 to sundarika-bhāradvāja
buddha

151

Whose anger’s disappeared,
who has unclouded mind,
who’s free from lustfulness,
whose sloth is thrust aside,

₄₈₈

guide for what’s beyond the bounds,
Knower of birth-and-death,
Sage with sagely virtues,
arrived at the sacriﬁce,

₄₈₉

with super pride removed,
revere with lotussed hands,
honour with food and drink,
thus prosper rightful gifts.

₄₉₀

sundarika The Buddha, sir, is worthy of sacriﬁcial cake,

a ﬁeld for merits,
recipient of all the world,
what’s given to you bears great fruit.

₄₉₁

When this was said, the brahmin Sundarika-Bhāradvāja said to
the Radiant One: “Magniﬁcent, master Gotama! The Dharma has been
clariﬁed by Master Gotama in many ways, as though he was righting
what was overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way
to one who was lost, or holding a lamp in the dark so that those with
eyes can see forms. I go for Refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dharma,
and to the Bhikkhu-Saṅgha that I may receive the Leaving home from
the venerable Gotama with ordination.” Then the brahmin SundarikaBhāradvāja received this.
Not long after his ordination the venerable, living in solitude, secluded, diligent and zealous by realizing from himself with Direct
Knowledge here and now entered upon and abided in that supreme
goal of the Good Life for the sake of which clansmen rightly leave home
for homelessness. He Knew directly: birth is destroyed, the Good Life

152

sutta nipāta

has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more
coming to any state of being. And the venerable Sundarika-Bhāradvāja
became one of the arahants.
(Snp 458–491)

3.5

To Māgha on Giving
Māgha Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Radiant one dwelt at Rājagaha on the Vulture Peak
Mountain. Then the young brahmin Māgha went to the Radiant One
and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and amiable
talk was ﬁnished, he sat down to one side and spoke thus to the Radiant
One:
“Master Gotama, I am certainly a donor, one who is generous and
glad to comply with others’ requests. From wealth sought rightly, obtained rightly, acquired in accordance with Dharma, I give to one, two,
ten, twenty, a hundred or even more—so do I, Master Gotama giving
and bestowing in this way accrue much merit?”
“Certainly young brahmin, giving and bestowing in this way you
accrue much merit. If anyone is a donor, one who is generous and glad
to comply with others’ requests from wealth sought rightly, obtained
rightly, acquired in accordance with dharma and given to one, two,
ten, twenty, a hundred or even to more, that one accrues much merit.”
Then the brahmin youth Māgha addressed these verses to the Radiant One:
māgha

buddha

I ask the world-knower Gotama
who wanders homeless clad in kāsāya cloth:
One glad to comply with others’ requests,
a generous giver, one living at home,
a seeker of merit, desirer of merit,
who to other as sacriﬁce gives food and drink—
how would such oﬀerings be puriﬁed by this?
One glad to comply with others’ requests,
a generous giver, one living at home,
a seeker of merit, desirer of merit,

₄₉₂

154

māgha

buddha

sutta nipāta
who to others as sacriﬁce gives food and drink
achieves his results through those worthy of gifts.

₄₉₃

One glad to comply with others’ requests,
a generous giver, one living at home,
a seeker of merit, desirer of merit,
who to others as sacriﬁce gives good and drink—
Sir, who are the gift-worthy,
please speak about that.

₄₉₄

Those truly who fare unattached in the world,
own nothing, perfected, they’re self-controlled,
to them would a brahmin, on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₄₉₅

Who all the fetters and bonds have cut oﬀ,
tamed are they, freed, with no troubles or hopes,
to them would a brahmin, on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₄₉₆

Who from all fetters are released,
tamed and freed, with no troubles or hopes,
to them would a brahmin, on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₄₉₇

Passion and hatred, delusion—let go,
exhausted the inﬂows, lived the God Life,
to them would a brahmin, on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₄₉₈

In who lurks neither deceit nor conceit,
greed-free, unselﬁsh, trouble-free too,
to them would a brahmin, on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₄₉₉

3.5 to māgha

155

Those free of greed, unselﬁsh, without desire,
with inﬂows exhausted, the Good Life completed,
to them would a brahmin on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₅₀₀

They who to cravings have not succumbed,
the ﬂood overcrossed they unselﬁshly fare,
to them would a brahmin on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₅₀₁

But those with no cravings at all in the world
for being this, being that, now or afterwards,
to them would a brahmin, on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₅₀₂

They who fare homeless, sense-pleasures let go,
themselves well-restrained, as shuttle ﬂies straight,
to them would a brahmin, on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₅₀₃

Those passion-free, their faculties restrained,
as the Moon from the grip of Rāhu released,
to them would a brahmin, on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₅₀₄

Those who are calm, passion gone, anger-free,
who here have given up all places to go,
to them would a brahmin on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₅₀₅

Who’ve birth and death abandoned—nothing left
and all unsettling doubts have overcome,
to them would a brahmin, on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₅₀₆

156

sutta nipāta
With themselves as an island they fare in the world,
own nothing and everywhere utterly freed
to them would a brahmin, on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₅₀₇

Those who Know here as really it is—
“This is the last, no more being to come”—
to them would a brahmin, on merit intent,
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.

₅₀₈

The mindful in holy words learned, who in jhāna delight,
won to Awakening, the refuge of many,
to them would a brahmin, on merit intent,
₅₀₉
sacriﬁce at the right time and oblations bestow.
māgha

buddha

My question truly was not in vain
for the Radiant has spoken of gift-worthy ones.
This indeed you Know as it really is,
for certainly this Dharma’s Known to you.

₅₁₀

One glad to comply with others’ requests,
a generous giver, one living at home,
a seeker of merit, desirer of merit,
who to others as sacriﬁce gives food and drink,
tell me, O Radiant, the success of such sacriﬁce.

₅₁₁

Do you sacriﬁce! But during this sacriﬁcial act,
make your mind happy all of the time;
for the sacriﬁciant, this sacriﬁce is the base,
established in this one is rid of all faults.

₅₁₂

One with passions gone would other faults restrain,
developing boundless mettā-mind, in this,
continuously diligent by day and by night,
suﬀusing all directions boundlessly.

₅₁₃

3.5 to māgha

157

māgha

Who can be cleansed, released and Awakened?
With what does the self to the Brahma-world go?
O Sage, when asked reply to me—one who doesn’t know—
for the Radiant I’ve seen with my eyes as Brahmā today
and it’s true that you’re the same as Brahmā for us.
In the Brahma-world,
₅₁₄
how does one arise, O Refulgent One?

buddha

The sacriﬁciant who achieves triple success in sacriﬁce,
achieves their results through such gift-worthy ones;
so perfected in sacriﬁce
and complying with others’ requests,
₅₁₅
that one arises, I say, within the Brahma-world.

When this was said the young brahmin Māgha said to the Radiant
One: “Magniﬁcent, Master Gotama! The Dharma has been clariﬁed by
Master Gotama in many ways, as though he was righting what was
overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who
was lost, or holding a lamp in the dark so that those with eyes can see
forms. I go for Refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dharma and to the
Saṅgha. May Master Gotama remember me as a layman who from
today has Gone for Refuge for life.
(Snp 492–515)

3.6

Sabhiya’s Questions
Sabhiya Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Radiant One dwelt at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove,
the Squirrels’ Feeding-ground. Now at that time a deva gave a question to Sabhiya the Wanderer, who had been his relative in a past life,
saying, “Sabhiya, if any ascetic or brahmin can answer this question,
you should live the Holy Life with them.”
When Sabhiya the Wanderer had learned that question from the
deva, he approached various respected ascetics and brahmins and
asked them the question. These included teachers with large followings and many devotees, well-known and famous, well-regarded by
many people as having crossed over, such as Pūraṇa Kassapa, Makkhali
Gosālo, Ajita Kesakambala, Pakudha Kaccāna, Sañcaya Belaṭṭhaputta,
and Nigaṇṭha Nāṭaputta. But when they were asked this question, they
were not able to answer, and they showed unreasonable anger and
annoyance. Then they asked Sabhiya questions in return.
Then it occurred to Sabhiya, “These teachers are not able to answer
my question, and instead they ask me about something else. Perhaps I
should return to the lesser life and enjoy sensual pleasures.”
Then he thought, “There is also this Ascetic Gotama, who is a teacher
with a large following and many devotees, well-known and famous,
well-regarded by many people as having crossed over. Why don’t I go
and ask him this question?”
But then it occurred to him, “The respected ascetics and brahmins
who I asked previously—Pūraṇa Kassapa, Makkhali Gosālo, Ajita Kesakambala, Pakudha Kaccāna, Sañcaya Belaṭṭhaputta, and Nigaṇṭha
Nāṭaputta—were not able to answer me, and they are old, elderly, great
ﬁgures, come to the last stage of life, seniors, long gone forth. How
could this Ascetic Gotama answer my question, since he is young, and
only recently gone forth?”

3.6 sabhiya’s questions

159

Then he thought, “An ascetic should not be despised or held in
contempt just because they are young. The Ascetic Gotama is young,
but he is of great psychic power and might. Why don’t I go to him and
ask this question?”
The Wanderer Sabhiya then set out for Rājagaha. Wandering by
stages he arrived at Rājagaha and went to the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrel’s Feeding Place. He approached the Buddha, exchanged courteous
and amiable greetings with him, and sat down to one side. Then he
addressed the Buddha with the following verses.
sabhiya

buddha

I have come ﬁlled with doubts,
Wishing to ask a question;
When I ask them, please put them to rest,
By explaining each and every matter to me.

₅₁₆

Sabhiya, you have come from afar,
Wishing to ask a question;
When you ask them, I will put them to rest,
By explaining each and every matter to you.

₅₁₇

Ask me, Sabhiya, your question,
Whatever you wish,
I will put to rest
Each and every question.

₅₁₈

Then it occurred to Sabhiya the Wanderer: “How amazing! How
incredible! With those other ascetics and brahmins I couldn’t get so
much as an opportunity, while this Ascetic Gotama makes the opportunity himself!” Pleased and joyful, uplifted with rapture and happiness,
he asked the Buddha this question.
sabhiya

Attaining what is one called a “bhikkhu”?
How is one “gentle”? And how “tamed”?
Why is one called “awakened”?
Please answer me this question, Lord.

₅₁₉

160
buddha

sutta nipāta
By the path they walked themselves,
Nirvāṇa is realized and doubt is left behind;
Existence and non-existence have been abandoned,
Complete, having ended rebirth: they are a “bhikkhu”. ₅₂₀
Mindful and equanimous everywhere,
They do not harm anyone in the world;
An ascetic crossed over, without distress,
And with no vanity: they are “gentle”.

₅₂₁

With faculties developed
For the whole world, inside and out;
They have understood this world and the next,
And complete their time fulﬁlled: they are “tamed”.

₅₂₂

Having thoroughly investigated the ages
Of transmigration through both deaths and births,
Free of passion and deﬁlements, pure,
Arrived at the end of rebirth:
such is called “awakened”.

₅₂₃

Then Sabhiya the Wanderer rejoiced, thankful for the Buddha’s
answer. Pleased and joyful, uplifted with rapture and happiness, he
asked the Buddha a further question.
sabhiya

buddha

Attaining what is one called a “brahmin”?
How is one an “ascetic”? And how “washed”?
Why is one called “dragon”?
Please answer me this question, Lord.

₅₂₄

Having shaken oﬀ all bad deeds,
Stainless, well-stilled, and steadfast;
Gone beyond transmigration, consummate,
Unattached: such is called a “brahmin”.

₅₂₅

3.6 sabhiya’s questions

161

Settled, with good and bad abandoned,
Dustless, knowing this world and the next;
Transcending birth and death,
True to themselves: such is called an “ascetic”.

₅₂₆

Having washed oﬀ all bad deeds,
For the whole world, inside and out;
They have no wish for the human
Or divine existences: that is called “washed”.

₅₂₇

Doing no harm at all in the world,
Not tied to any fetters;
Unattached everywhere, and free,
True to themselves: such is called a “dragon”.

₅₂₈

Then Sabhiya the Wanderer rejoiced, thankful for the Buddha’s
answer. Pleased and joyful, uplifted with rapture and happiness, he
asked the Buddha a further question.
sabhiya

buddha

Who do the Buddhas say is the “victor on the ﬁeld”?
How is one “skilled”? And what is a “wise man”?
Why is one called a “sage”?
Please answer me this question, Lord.

₅₂₉

Having thoroughly investigated the ﬁelds,
Heavenly, human, even the Brahmā-ﬁelds,
One is freed from the root binding one to all ﬁelds,
True to themselves: such is called “victor on the ﬁeld”. ₅₃₀
Having thoroughly investigated the storehouses,
Heavenly, human, even the Brahmā-stores,
One is freed from the root binding one to all storehouses,
₅₃₁
True to themselves: such is called “skilled”.

162

sutta nipāta
Having investigated the sense ﬁelds
Both inside and out, one is of pure wisdom;
Transcending black and white,
True to themselves: such is called “wise”.

₅₃₂

Knowing good and bad principles,
Inside and out in all the world;
Worthy of worship by gods and humans,
Gone beyond the tie and the net, they are a sage.

₅₃₃

Then Sabhiya the Wanderer rejoiced, thankful for the Buddha’s
answer. Pleased and joyful, uplifted with rapture and happiness, he
asked the Buddha a further question.
sabhiya

buddha

Attaining what is one called “knowledgable”?
How is one “informed”? And how “energetic”?
Why is one called “thoroughbred”?
Please answer me this question, Lord.

₅₃₄

Having thoroughly investigated the knowledges,
Whether those of ascetics or of brahmins,
One is free of desire for all feelings,
Gone beyond all feelings, they are “knowledgable”.

₅₃₅

Understanding the proliferation
Of mental and physical phenomena,
Inside and out, the root of disease;
One is freed from the root binding one to all diseases,
₅₃₆
True to themselves: such is called “informed”.
Abstaining from all bad deeds,
The energetic one escapes the suﬀering of hell;
Energetic, resolute,
True to themselves: such is called “hero”.

₅₃₇

3.6 sabhiya’s questions

163

One who has cut the bonds,
Inside and out, the root of attachment;
One is freed from the root binding one to all attachments,
₅₃₈
True to themselves: such is called “informed”.
Then Sabhiya the Wanderer rejoiced, thankful for the Buddha’s
answer. Pleased and joyful, uplifted with rapture and happiness, he
asked the Buddha a further question.
sabhiya

buddha

Attaining what is one called “scholar”?
How is one “noble”?
And how “well conducted”?
Why is one called “wanderer”?
Please answer me this question, Lord.

₅₃₉

Having learned all phenomena
in the world with direct knowledge,
Whatever is blameworthy or blameless;
One who is a winner, doubtless, free,
Untroubled in every respect, is a “scholar”.

₅₄₀

Having cut oﬀ corruptions and attachments,
Knowing, one does not go to another womb.
Dispelling the three deﬁled perceptions,
He comes back for no age,
that is who they call “noble”.

₅₄₁

One who is accomplished in good conduct,
Always skilful in understanding principles;
Not attached anywhere, with mind freed,
And bearing no grudges, is “well conducted”.

₅₄₂

Whatever deeds are to result in suﬀering,
Above, below, across, or in-between;

164

sutta nipāta
Having gone forth one lives to fully understand
Illusions, conceit, as well as greed and hatred;
Terminating mental and physical phenomena,
That, they say, is an accomplished wanderer.

₅₄₃

Then Sabhiya the Wanderer rejoiced, thankful for the Buddha’s answer. Pleased and joyful, uplifted with rapture and happiness, he stood
up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, and, raising his
folded palms to the Buddha, spoke these suitable verses of praise in
his presence.
sabhiya

One of vast wisdom, you have dispelled the dark ﬂood,
The three and sixty doctrines of the ascetics,
Which are false refuges,
₅₄₄
Dependent on perceptions and conventions.
You’ve made an end, crossed over suﬀering,
I hold you as an arahant,
Fully awakened, with corruptions ended;
Brilliant, thoughtful, with expansive wisdom,
You have brought me across, ﬁnisher of suﬀering.

₅₄₅

Understanding my anxiety,
You carried me over my doubts. Homage to you!
Sage accomplished in the ways of silence,
You are gentle, not callous, Kinsman of the Sun.

₅₄₆

The anxieties I had before,
You have answered them, seer;
For sure you are a sage, fully awakened,
You have no hindrances.

₅₄₇

All of your griefs
Are demolished and destroyed;

3.6 sabhiya’s questions

165

You are cooled, tamed,
Firm and strong in truth.

₅₄₈

Dragon of dragons, great hero,
While you are speaking,
The gods all rejoice,
Both Nāradas and Pabbatas.

₅₄₉

Homage to you, thoroughbred among men!
Homage to you, best of men!
In all the world with its gods,
There is no-one like you.

₅₅₀

You are the Buddha, you are the Teacher,
You are the sage who overcame Māra;
You have cut all underlying tendencies,
Crossed over, you bring this generation across.

₅₅₁

You have transcended all attachments,
And destroyed your corruptions;
You are a lion, without grasping,
With fears and terrors abandoned.

₅₅₂

As a drop of dew
Does not smear a lotus,
Neither good nor bad smears you.
Stretch out your feet, my hero,
Sabhiya bows to his teacher!

₅₅₃

And then Sabhiya the wanderer, fell at the Buddha’s feet and said
to him: “Amazing, venerable sir, incredible, venerable sir! It is as if
someone were to turn upright what had been overturned, to reveal
what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to light a
lamp in the darkness, so that those with eyes could see. In the same

166

sutta nipāta

way the Buddha has made the Dhamma clear in many ways. I go to
the Buddha for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the monastic Saṅgha.
Bhante, I ask for the going forth and ordination in the Lord’s presence.”
“Sabhiya, anyone who was previously a follower of another sect and
who asks for going forth and ordination in this Dhamma and Vinaya
should stay on probation for four months. When four months have
passed, the monastics, if they are satisﬁed, may give the going forth
and ordination into the status of a bhikkhu. However, I also consider
individual cases diﬀerently.”
“Venerable sir, in that case I will remain on probation for four years,
and after four years if the monastics are satisﬁed they may give me the
going forth and ordination into the status of a bhikkhu.”
Then Sabhiya the Wanderer received the going forth and ordination
in the Buddha’s presence. … And he became one of the arahants.
(Snp 516–553)

3.7

To Sela and his Praise of the Buddha
Sela Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Radiant One was journeying through the lands
of the Aṅguttarāpans, accompanied by a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus,
twelve hundred and ﬁfty of them and arrived at a town called Āpaṇa.
The ascetic Keṇiya of the Dreadlocked Hair heard this: “The Samaṇa
Gotama, son of the Sakiyans who left home among the Sakyan people has been journeying among the Aṅguttarāpans accompanied by
a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus, twelve hundred and ﬁfty of them, and
he has arrived in Āpaṇa. Now an excellent report has spread to this
eﬀect: “The Radiant One is an Arahant, fully Awakened, perfect in true
knowledge and conduct, whose going is auspicious, knower of worlds,
incomparable leader of people to be famed, Teacher of devas and humanity, Awakened and Radiant. He declares this world with its devas,
Māras, princes and people which he has realized by direct knowledge
himself. He teaches Dharma good at the beginning, the middle and the
end, complete with purpose and meaning, revealing the good life, that
which is completely fulﬁlled and wholly puriﬁed.” Now, it is good to
see such Arahants.
Then Keṇiya of the Dreadlocked Hair went to see the Radiant One
and exchanged greetings with him and when that courteous and amiable talk was ﬁnished he sat down to one side. The Radiant One instructed, urged, roused and encouraged him with Dharma-talk after
which Keṇiya said, “Let Master Gotama together with the Saṅgha of
bhikkhus consent to accept tomorrow’s meal from me.”
The Radiant One replied to him, “The Saṅgha of bhikkhus Keṇiya,
is large, of twelve hundred and ﬁfty. And you have conﬁdence also in
the brahmins.”
This request was repeated a second and a third time by Keṇiya, and
only on the third occasion did the Buddha accept by remaining silent.

168

sutta nipāta

Then Keṇiya, knowing that the Buddha had accepted, paid respects,
rose from his seat and went to his own hermitage. He addressed his
friends and colleagues, family and relatives, saying “Listen, my good
friends and colleagues, family and relatives! I have invited the ascetic
Gotama for the meal tomorrow, together with the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
Would you assist me with the various duties?”
“Yes, sir,” agreed Keṇiya’s friends and colleagues, family and relatives. And some dug out the ovens, some chopped wood, some washed
the dishes, some put out the water pot, while others prepared the seats.
And in the evening, Keṇiya set up a pavilion.
Now at that time the brahmin Sela was visting Āpaṇa. He was
an expert in the three Vedas, with the etymologies, the rituals, the
phonology and word analysis, and ﬁfthly the legendary histories. He
was a linguist, a grammarian, a cosmologist, and an expert in the
marks of a Superman. He taught the Vedic texts to three hundred
young students.
Now at that time Keṇiya of the Dreadlocked Hair had conﬁdence
in the brahmin Sela. Then Sela accompanied by his three hundred
students were out for a walk, and they came to the hermitage of Keṇiya.
Sela saw the activity in the hermitage and said to Keṇiya, “Master
Keṇiya, are your son or daughter being married, or are you preparing a
great sacriﬁce, or have you invited Seniya Bimbisāra, king of Magadha,
tomorrow together with his army?”
“No, Sela, there is no marriage, nor has the king been invited. However I am preparing a great sacriﬁce. There is this ascetic Gotama, who
has gone forth from the Sakyan clan, and he has arrived at Āpaṇa together with a great Saṅgha of bhikkhus. Now an excellent report has
spread to this eﬀect: ‘The Radiant One is an Arahant, fully Awakened,
perfect in true knowledge and conduct, whose going is auspicious,
knower of worlds, incomparable leader of people to be famed, Teacher
of devas and humanity, Awakened and Radiant.’ I have invited him for
the meal tomorrow together with the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.”

3.7 to sela

169

“Keṇiya, did you say ‘Awakened’?”
“Yes, Sela, I said ‘Awakened’!”
“Keṇiya, did you say ‘Awakened’?”
“Yes, Sela, I said ‘Awakened’!”
Then it occurred to the brahmin Sela: “It is hard to even hear the
word ‘Awakened’ in the world today. There has come down in our sacred scriptures the thirty-two marks of a Superman, possessing which
a Superman has two destinies, no other. If he dwells at home he will
be a king, a just emperor, a just king, conqueror of the four directions,
who has stabilized the realm, and possesses the seven treasures. And
these are his seven treasures: the Wheel treasure, the elephant treasure, the horse treasure, the jewel treasure, the woman treasure, the
householder treasure, and seventh, the adviser treasure. He has more
than a thousand sons who are valiant, heroic, crushers of the armies
of foes. Having conquered this earth to the shores of the seas he rules
justly, without weapons or violence. But if he goes forth from the home
life into homelessness, then he becomes an arahant, a fully awakened
Buddha, one who draws back the veil from the world.” “So where now,
Master Keṇiya, is that Master Gotama living, the arahant, the fully
awakened Buddha?”
When he said this, Keṇiya of the Dreadlocked hair took the brahmin
Sela by the right arm and said, “There, where that line of blue forest is,
master Sela.” Then Sela with his three hundred students approached
the Buddha. Sela addressed his students, saying, “Come quietly, sirs!
Place each step one after the other! For the Buddhas are hard to approach, like lions living alone. And when I am conversing with the
ascetic Gotama, don’t interrupt our discussion, but wait until we have
ﬁnished.”
And then Sela approached the Buddha, engaged in polite greetings
and conversation, and sat down to one side. He scrutinized the Buddha’s body for the thirty-two marks of a Superman. He saw most of
them, except for two, regarding which he had doubts: whether the

170

sutta nipāta

private parts were sheathed, and the tongue was long.
The Buddha knew that Sela saw most of the thirty-two marks, but
doubted two. So he performed an act of psychic power such that Sela
could see that his private parts were sheathed. Then he put out his
tongue and licked both his ears, and both his nostrils, and covered his
whole forehead with his tongue.
Then it occurred to Sela: “The ascetic Gotama does indeed possess
all of the thirty-two marks of a Superman. But I do not know whether
he is awakened or not. I have heard it said by elder and respected
brahmins, the teachers of teachers, that whoever is an arahant, a fully
awakened Buddha, will reveal themselves when their own praise is
spoken. Why don’t I praise the ascetic Gotama in his presence with
suitable verses?” Then the brahmin Sela spoke the following.
sela

O you of perfect form and beauty rare,
proportioned well and lovely to behold,
in colour like ﬁne gold, with shining teeth,
You are the Exalted, the Energetic One.

₅₅₄

Whose body shows forth all the minor marks
distinguishing a well-proportioned man,
while all upon your body can be seen
the signs peculiar to the Superman.

₅₅₅

You with eyes so clear, so fair your countenance,
and you so tall, so straight, majestical
amidst the order of the samaṇas
do blazon forth as does the sun on high.

₅₅₆

O you a bhikkhu good to gaze upon,
having a skin resembling ﬁnest gold,
what is this life of samaṇas to you,
having a presence so supremely fair?

₅₅₇

buddha

sela

buddha

3.7 to sela

171

You deserve to be a King who turns the wheel,
riding in state a chariot of war,
lord of the earth from end to end four square,
a Conqueror of Jambudīpa chief.

₅₅₈

Nobles and wealth lords your vassals be
You Sovran Lord of lords, You King of men,
take then your power, O Gotama, and reign.

₅₅₉

I am a king, Sela,
The unexcelled King of Dhamma;
By Dhamma I roll forth the Wheel,
The Wheel that cannot be turned back.

₅₆₀

You say you are awakened,
The unexcelled King of Dhamma;
“By Dhamma I roll forth the Wheel”,
So you say, Gotama.

₅₆₁

Who then is your general,
The student who follows the teacher;
Who keeps the Wheel of Dhamma
rolling after you?

₅₆₂

By me is the Wheel rolled forth,
The unexcelled Wheel of Dhamma,
Sāriputta keeps the Wheel of Dhamma
rolling after me.

₅₆₃

What should be Known is Known;
What should be developed has been developed;
What should be abandoned I have abandoned:
That, brahmin, is why I am awakened.

₅₆₄

172

sela

pupils

sutta nipāta
Dispell doubts in me,
Have conﬁdence, brahmin;
This sight is hard to ﬁnd,
For Buddhas arise only rarely.

₅₆₅

That which is hard to ﬁnd in the world,
Manifesting only rarely;
I, brahmin, am awakened,
The unexcelled surgeon.

₅₆₆

I am supreme, I am incomparable,
Crusher of Māra’s armies;
Having subjugated all my enemies,
I rejoice, afraid of nothing.

₅₆₇

Good sirs, listen up
As the seer speaks,
The surgeon, the great hero,
Roars like a lion in the forest.

₅₆₈

He is supreme, he is incomparable,
Crusher of Māra’s armies;
Who seeing him would not be inspired,
Unless their nature was dark?

₅₆₉

What I wished for has arrived,
What I didn’t wish for has departed;
Right now I will go forth,
In the presence of the one of excellent wisdom.

₅₇₀

If this is your pleasure, sir,
We too will go forth
In the teaching of the fully awakened Buddha,
In the presence of the one of excellent wisdom.

₅₇₁

3.7 to sela

173

narrator Then these three hundred brahmins

buddha

Asked, with palms folded:
“We would live the Holy Life
In the presence of the Buddha.”

₅₇₂

The Holy Life is well-explained,
Apparent here and now, realizable in this very life,
Wherein the going forth is not fruitless,
For one who trains themselves diligently.

₅₇₃

Then the brahmin Sela and his following gained the going forth
and ordination in the Buddha’s presence. When the night had passed,
Keṇiya of the Dreadlocked Hair, having prepared much ﬁne food in his
hermitage, had the time announced to the Buddha: “It is time, Master
Gotama, the meal is ready.” In the morning, the Buddha dressed, took
his bowl and robe, went to Keṇiya’s hermitage, and sat on the prepared
seat together with the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
Then Keṇiya served and satisﬁed the Saṅgha of bhikkhus with the
Buddha at its head with ﬁne food. Then when the Buddha had ﬁnished
eating and had taken his hand from his bowl, Keṇiya sat at one side
on a low seat, where the Buddha expressed his appreciation with the
following verses.
buddha

The ﬁre-oblation is the foremost of sacriﬁces;
The Sāvitrī is the foremost of poetic styles;
A king is the foremost of humans;
The ocean is the foremost of rivers.

₅₇₄

The moon is the foremost of heavenly bodies;
The sun the foremost of ﬁres;
But for those wishing to do good,
An oﬀering to the Saṅgha is foremost.

₅₇₅

When the Buddha had expressed his appreciation to Keṇiya with
these verses, he got up from his seat and left.

174

sutta nipāta

Then venerable Sela and his following, living in solitude, secluded,
diligent and zealous by realizing for themselves with Direct Knowledge here and now entered upon and abided in that supreme goal of
the Holy Life for the sake of which clansmen rightly leave home for
homelessness. They Knew directly: birth is destroyed, the Holy Life
has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more
coming to any state of being. And the venerable Sela and his following
became arahants.
Then Sela and his following approached the Buddha, arranged their
robes over one shoulder, extended their folded palms, and spoke the
following verses:
sela

Eight days have passed, All-seeing Sage,
since for refuge we have gone.
In seven nights, O Radiant One,
in your teaching we’ve been tamed.

₅₇₆

The Buddha you are, the Teacher you are,
the Sage overcomer of Māra,
so sheared of all evil tendencies,
gone across and taken all others.

₅₇₇

All attachments have been surmounted,
all inﬂows are removed,
as a lion ungrasping,
abandoned fear and dread.

₅₇₈

Here stand three hundred bhikkhus,
with hands held out as lotuses:
stretch forth your feet, O Hero great,
that these now unblemished ones
may bow at their Teacher’s feet.

₅₇₉
(Snp 554–579)

3.8

Dart of Death
Salla Sutta
Here’s the life of mortals,
wretched and brief,
its end unknown,
to dukkha joined.

₅₈₀

There’s no means that those
who’re born will never die.
Reached decay, then death:
the law for beings all.

₅₈₁

As with what’s ripe
there’s always fear of falling,
so for mortals born
there’s always fear of death.

₅₈₂

Just as a potter’s vessels
made of clay all end
by being broken, so
death’s the end of life.

₅₈₃

The young, those great in age,
the fools, as well the wise
all go under the sway
of death, for death’s their goal.

₅₈₄

Those overcome by death,
to another world bound:
father can’t protect his son,
nor relatives their kin.

₅₈₅

While relatives are watching,
they weep and they lament;

176

sutta nipāta
See mortals one by one,
led as an ox to slaughter.

₅₈₆

As the world’s aﬄicted
by death and by decay,
so the wise grieve not,
knowing world’s nature well.

₅₈₇

Their path you do not know
whereby they come, they go,
neither end you see,
useless your lament.

₅₈₈

While lamenting,
The confused harm themselves;
If any beneﬁt could be found,
Would not the wise do it to?

₅₈₉

Not by weeping and wailing,
Can peace of mind be reached.
It just creates more suﬀering,
And distresses the body.

₅₉₀

You become thin and discolored,
Harming yourself with your self;
And the departed are not protected by this,
Lamentation is pointless!

₅₉₁

When grief is not abandoned,
A person falls into even more suﬀering;
Wailing over the dead,
They are overpowered by grief.

₅₉₂

See how others fare,
People passing on according to their deeds;

3.8 dart of death

177

Creatures tremble,
As they fall under the sway of Death.

₅₉₃

Whatever you think it is,
It becomes something else.
Such is separation,
See the way of the world.

₅₉₄

Even if a person were to live
A hundred years or more,
They would still be divided from their family,
Abandoning this life.

₅₉₅

That is why having heard the arahant,
And dispelled lamentation;
When you see the dead and departed,
You don’t think you can get them back.

₅₉₆

Just as one would extinguish
A burning building with water;
So too a steadfast, wise one, a skilful, clever person,
Would quickly blow away
Grief when it arises,
As wind, a tuft of cotton.

₅₉₇

One who is seeking happiness
should draw out the painful dart—
lamentations and longings—
the grief that is within.

₅₉₈

Dart withdrawn and unattached,
the mind attains to peace,
passed beyond all grief,
grieﬂess, ﬁres put out.

₅₉₉
(Snp 580–599)

3.9

To Vāseṭṭha on Who is a Brahmin
Vāseṭṭha Sutta

Thus have I heard:³
At one time the Radiant One was dwelling at Icchānaṅgala. Now at
that time a number of notable and prosperous brahmins were staying
at lcchānangala, that is to say the brahmins Caṅkī, Tārukkha, Pokkharasāti, Jāṇussoni and Todeyya, as well as other notable and prosperous
brahmins.
Then, as the young brahmins Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvaia were walking and wandering for exercise this subject of discussion arose between
them. “How is one a brahmin?” The young brahmin Bhāradvaja said,
“When one is well-born on both sides, of pure maternal and paternal
descent through seven generations in the past, then one is a brahmin”.
But Vāseṭṭha the young brahmin said, “When one is virtuous and
fulﬁls one’s vows, then one is a brahmin”. Bhāradvaja could not convince Vāseṭṭha while the latter failed to convince the former.
Then Vāseṭṭha said to Bhāradvaja, “Sir, the samaṇa Gotama son of
the Sakyas who left home from the Sakyan clan is living at Icchānaṅgala, in the forest near Icchānaṅgala. Now the good reputation of Master Gotama has spread in this way: ‘That Radiant One is accomplished,
completely Awakened, possessed of True Knowledge and conduct, wellgone for himself and others, knower of the worlds, unexcelled trainer
of those who can be tamed, teacher of devas and humanity, Awake and
Radiant.’ Come, Bhāradvaja, let us go to the samaṇa Gotama and ask
him about this. As he replies, so will we bear his words in mind.”
“Yes, sir”, Bharadvaja replied.
So the two young brahmins approached the Radiant One and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and amiable talk
was concluded, they sat down to one side, and the young brahmin
Vāseṭṭha addressed the Radiant One in verse:
³ This Sutta = MN 98

3.9 to vāseṭṭha

179

vāseṭṭha Of Pokkharasāti the pupil I am,

while student of Tārukkha is he;
both of us have acknowledged mastery
in the threefold Veda lore.

₆₀₀

We have attained totality
over all the Vedic masters teach;
as philologists, grammarians,
and we chant as our masters do.

₆₀₁

The subject of “birth”, O Gotama,
is contention’s cause with us:
he, a Bhāradvāja, does declare
“birth” is due to brahmin caste,
while I say its by karma caused:
know its thus, O One-with-Eyes.

₆₀₂

Sir, to ask about this we have come,
to you acclaimed as Wide Awake,
each of us unable is
the other to convince.

₆₀₃

As they raise their lotussed hands
towards the moon waxed full,
so to you, by this world revered,
we pay homage too.

₆₀₄

So now of Gotama the Eye
uprisen in the world, we ask:
Is one by “birth” a brahmin,
or a brahmin karma-caused?
Explain to us who do not know
how we should “brahmin” recognize?

₆₀₅

180
buddha

sutta nipāta
I shall analyse for you,
in order due and as they are,
the types of “birth” ’mong living things,
for many are the sorts of birth.

₆₀₆

First, there’s grasses and the trees,
though of themselves they nothing know,
each species possessing its own marks,
for many are the sorts of birth.

₆₀₇

Next come beetles, butterﬂies,
and so on to the termites, ants,
each species possessing its own marks,
for many are the sorts of birth.

₆₀₈

Then, know of those four-footed kinds,
both the tiny and the huge,
each species possessing its own marks
for many are the sorts of birth.

₆₀₉

Know those whose bellies are their feet,
that is, the long-backed group of snakes,
each species possessing its own marks,
for many are the sorts of birth.

₆₁₀

Know too the many kinds of ﬁsh,
living in their watery world,
each species possessing its own marks,
for many are the sorts of birth.

₆₁₁

Then know the varied winged ones,
the birds that range the open skies,
each species possessing its own marks,
for many are the sorts of birth.

₆₁₂

3.9 to vāseṭṭha

181

While in those births are diﬀerences,
each having their own distinctive marks,
among humanity such diﬀerences
of species—no such marks are found.

₆₁₃

Neither in hair, nor in the head,
not in the ears or eyes,
neither found in mouth or nose,
not in lips or brows.

₆₁₄

Neither in neck, nor shoulders found,
not in belly or the back,
neither in buttocks nor the breast,
not in groin or sexual parts.

₆₁₅

Neither in hands nor in the feet,
not in ﬁngers or the nails,
neither in knees nor in the thighs,
not in their “colour”, not in sound,
here is no distinctive mark
as in the many other sorts of birth.

₆₁₆

In human bodies as they are,
such diﬀerences cannot be found:
the only human diﬀerences
are those in names alone.

₆₁₇

’Mong humankind whoever lives
by raising cattle on a farm,
O Vāseṭṭha you should know
as farmer not as Brahmin then.

₆₁₈

’Mong humankind whoever lives
by trading wares here and there,

182

sutta nipāta
O Vāseṭṭha you should know
as merchant not as Brahmin then.

₆₁₉

’Mong humankind whoever lives
by work of many arts and crafts,
O Vāseṭṭha you should know
as craftsman not as Brahmin then.

₆₂₀

’Mong humankind whoever lives
by serving other’ needs and wants,
O Vāseṭṭha you should know
as servant not as Brahmin then.

₆₂₁

’Mong humankind whoever lives
by taking things that are not given,
O Vāseṭṭha you should know
as a thief not Brahmin then.

₆₂₂

’Mong humankind whoever lives
by the skill of archery,
O Vāseṭṭha you should know
as soldier not as Brahmin then.

₆₂₃

’Mong humankind whoever lives
by performing priestly rites,
O Vāseṭṭha you should know
as a priest not Brahmin then.

₆₂₄

’Mong humankind whoever lives
through enjoying towns and lands,
O Vāseṭṭha you should know
as rajah not as Brahmin then.

₆₂₅

Him I call not a brahmin, though
born from brahmin mother’s line,

3.9 to vāseṭṭha

183

if with sense of ownership,
he’s just supercilious:
owning nothing and unattached—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₂₆

Who fetters all has severed,
who trembles not at all,
gone beyond ties, free from bonds—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₂₇

Having cut strap and reins,
the rope and bridle too,
and tipped the shafts, as one Awake—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₂₈

Who angerless endures abuse,
beating and imprisonment,
with patience-power, an arméd might—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₂₉

Who’s angerless and dutiful,
of virtue full and free of lust,
who’s tamed, to ﬁnal body come—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₃₀

Like water drop on lotus leaf,
or mustard seed on needle point,
whoso clings not to sense desires,
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₃₁

Here who comes to Know
exhaustion of all dukkha,
laid down the burden, free from bonds—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₃₂

184

sutta nipāta
Skilled in the Path, what’s not the path,
in wisdom deep, sagacious one,
having attained the highest aim—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₃₃

Not intimate with those gone forth,
nor with those who dwell at home,
without a shelter, wishes few—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₃₄

Who has renounced all force
towards all being weak and strong,
who causes not to kill, nor kills—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₃₅

Among the hostile, friendly,
among the violent, cool,
detached amid the passionate—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₃₆

From whoever lust and hate,
conceit, contempt have dropped away,
as mustard seed from needle-point—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₃₇

Who utters speech instructive,
true and gentle too,
who gives oﬀence to none—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₃₈

Who in the world will never take
what is not given, long or short,
the great or small, the fair or foul—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₃₉

3.9 to vāseṭṭha

185

In whom there are not longings found
for this world or the next,
longingless and free from bonds—
on such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₄₀

In whom is no dependence found,
with Final Knowledge, free from doubt,
duly wont to the Deathless deeps—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₄₁

Here who’s gone beyond both bonds:
to goodness and to evil too,
one who’s sorrowless, stainless, pure—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₄₂

Vanished is all love of being,
like the moon—unblemished, pure,
that one serene and undisturbed—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₄₃

Who’s overpassed this diﬃcult path,
delusion’s bond, the wandering-on,
who’s crossed beyond, contemplative,
craving not, no questions left,
no clinging’s fuel, so Cool become—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₄₄

Who has abandoned sense desires,
as homeless one renouncing all,
desire for being all consumed—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₄₅

Who has abandoned craving here
as homeless one renouncing all,

186

sutta nipāta
craving for being all consumed—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₄₆

Abandoned all the human bonds
and gone beyond the bonds of god
unbound one is from every bond—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₄₇

Abandoned boredom and delight,
become quite cool and assetless
A hero, All-worlds conqueror,
one such I say’s a Brahmin then

₆₄₈

Whoever knows of being’ death,
their being born in every way,
unshackled, faring well, Awake—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₄₉

Whose destination is unknown
to humans, spirits or to gods,
pollutions faded, Arahat—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₅₀

For whom there is not ownership
before or after or midway,
owning nothing and unattached—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₅₁

One noble, most excellent, heroic too,
the great sage and the one who conquers all,
who’s faultless, washes, one Awake—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₅₂

Who knows their former births
and sees the states of bliss and woe

3.9 to vāseṭṭha

187

and then who wins the waste of births—
one such I say’s a Brahmin then.

₆₅₃

Whatever’s accepted and “name” and “clan”
is just a worldly designation—
by conventions handed down
accepted everywhere.

₆₅₄

But those asleep, unquestioning,
who take up views, who do not Know,
unknowingly they’ve long declared:
one’s a brahmin just by “birth”.

₆₅₅

One’s not a brahmin caused by “birth”,
nor caused by “birth” a non-brahmin;
a brahmin’s one by karma caused,
by karma caused a non-brahmin.

₆₅₆

By karma caused a farmer is,
one’s a craftsman karma-caused,
by karma caused a merchant is,
one’s a servant karma-caused.

₆₅₇

By karma caused a robber is,
one’s a soldier karma-caused,
by karma caused a priest becomes,
one’s a ruler karma-caused.

₆₅₈

Thus according as it is
people wise do karma see;
Seers of causal relatedness,
skilled in karma, its results.

₆₅₉

Karma makes the world go on,
people by karma, circle round;

188

sutta nipāta
sentient beings are bound to karma,⁴
as a cart is pulled by a horse.

₆₆₀

By ardour and the Good Life leading,
with restraint and taming too:
by this a Brahmin one becomes,
one’s by this a Brahmin best.

₆₆₁

Possessed of Triple Knowledges,
at Peace, rebirth come to an end⁵—
know Vāseṭṭha, such a one
is Brahmā and Sakra for those who Know.

₆₆₂

When this was said the young brahmins Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja exclaimed to the Radiant One: “Magniﬁcent, Master Gotama! The
Dharma has been clariﬁed by Master Gotama in many ways, as though
he was lighting what was overthrown revealing what was hidden,
showing the way to one who was lost, or holding a lamp in the dark so
that those with eyes can see forms. We go for refuge to Master Gotama,
to the Dharma and to the Saṅgha. May Master Gotama remember us
as upāsakas who from today have Gone for Refuge for life.
(Snp 600–662)

Notes on the Vāseṭṭha Sutta
As the Buddha has deﬁned what he means by the word “outcaste”,
vasala, in the Sutta of that name (Snp 1.7), so here he discourses with
two young brahmins on what makes one a true brahmin. Both outcaste
and brahmin are deﬁned according to Dharma, what one should avoid
in the ﬁrst case and what one should do in the second.
⁴ Sujato: lkm repeated the previous verse for these two lines, apparently by oversight.
I have translated them.
⁵ Sujato: khīṇapunabbhavo. lkm had “repeated being wasted away”, which I felt was
not very comprehensible.

3.9 to vāseṭṭha

189

In the society of the Buddha’s days (still found in present Indian
attitudes), the brahmins reckoned themselves the highest among all
the castes having been born of a brahmin mother and father whose
families were “pure” brahminical stock back through seven generations on both sides. It was enough to have such parents and families to
be born as a brahmin, they reckoned. Moreover, according to legend
the brahmins came from the head, the uppermost part of primeval
man, while other castes originated from the lower parts of that body,
the outcastes being merely the dust upon that ﬁrst man’s feet. Such
grounds for superiority, with exclusive knowledge of Vedic rites and
mysteries, endowed many brahmin men with a very inﬂated idea of
their own importance. (Women of brahmin families, though in very
early times also possessing knowledge of the Three (or four) Vedas together with ritual and correct transmission through chanting, lost this
eminence, and came to be regarded by brahmin men as just mothers
of their sons).
The verses of this Sutta can divided into a number of sections, each
one with distinct bearing upon the questions: What makes one a brahmin, “birth” as explained above, or karma—the results of intentional
actions, speech and body. These sections are as follows:
1. Vāseṭṭha’s laudatory and questioning verses (600–605).
2. The Buddha’s analysis of living things (606–617).
3. His deﬁnition of who is not a brahmin (618–625).
4. His verses upon who is a true Brahmin (626–653).
5. His concluding verses upon “caused by karma” (654–662).
Vāseṭṭha’s laudatory and questioning verses
The verses open with Vāseṭṭha telling the Buddha who were their respective teachers, as well as their own attainments, a sort of verbal
curriculum vitae. With this they are communicating their attainments
as brahmins, thereby informing him of the sort of people he will be

190

sutta nipāta

addressing. However, this is done with a great deal of politeness by
inserting such laudatory titles as “One-with-Eyes”, “Wide Awake” and
so on. They raise their lotussed hands, probably to their foreheads but
at least to their hearts, marking their respect for the teacher they are
questioning.
The Buddha’s analysis of living things
In these verses most of them have the refrain “each species possessing
its own marks/for many are the sorts of birth”, except for the ﬁrst one
which as only the latter line. It is important to remember that the word
“birth” had (and has) a very special meaning in India. Asking another
person (not uncommon even in modern India) about his or her “birth”,
is the equivalent to enquiring about the caste of their family. This is
required before one eats or drinks with other unknown people and of
course if marriage is contemplated. High caste persons (those from
brahmin or noble families) can lose their status through “pollution” by
eating or drinking with, or having with those of low caste according to
brahminical laws. The Buddha points out in the ﬁrst few of these verses
(606–612), that among the groups he describes there are many sorts of
birth. These verses are to highlight speciﬁc diﬀerentiation as opposed
to what is found among human beings as made clear in verses 613–617.
In other words, all human beings whatever their caste, colour, race
or language , are the same, with the same organs and characteristics.
In the last verse in this section the Buddha notes that diﬀerences are
merely nominal. In India this refers to “birth” or caste, in the rest of
the world to class, family, wealth, education etc. Such matters are only
conventional, not of the essence.
The Buddha is thus revealed as the ﬁrst person ever to reject racism
in any form. All human beings are basically the same in that they can
all practise the Dharma and experience the Awakened State. People
are only “high” or “low” according to Dharma by their behaviour. Elsewhere, the Buddha noted that one is noble by thought, speech and

3.9 to vāseṭṭha

191

action, not by worldly ennoblement. The word for noble in Pāli/Sanskrit is ariya/ārya conventionally meaning a high caste person, from
the clans of self-styled āryans invading India from around 1500 bce
onwards. But the Buddha’s interpretation of this word emphasized
the nobility of mind, speech and body actions. Such nobility has no
boundaries of race, caste, class or language.
Notice that in verse 616 the Buddha denies that there are essential
diﬀerences in “colour”. This is vaṇṇa in Pāli, varna in Sanskrit, and has
the general meaning in India of superior birth or inferior. High-caste
people are supposed to have light colours of skin, while workers and
outcasts are dark in complexion. However this myth does not always
work out as many brahmins in the south of the country are very nearly
black! Paired with “colour” is “sound”, meaning a polished way of
speech or an uneducated one. It is possible to distinguish the caste a
person belongs to by listening to their speech. Some words will point
out a brahmin background, others will only be used by outcastes.
The last verse in this section makes it clear that the only diﬀerences
among human beings are merely nominal. A man is only by tradition
a brahmin or an outcaste, there are no essential diﬀerences.
The Buddha’s deﬁnition of who is not a brahmin
Verses 618–625 deﬁne by a nominally brahmin-caste man’s work how
he could not be a brahmin, that is, he does not live up to the high standard set by the Buddha to qualify for the title of “brahmin”. As the
Buddha did not accept that one could be spiritually advanced merely
by being born of brahmin-caste parents, so neither was one even nominally a brahmin when one’s livelihood had nothing to do with caste
labels. Nominal brahmins in the Buddha’s days had departed from their
ancient religious ideals and had become over time farmers, craftsmen,
even rulers. They should not be counted even as nominal brahmins
and certainly not as Brahmins, those who are spiritually advanced.
In this book I have used “brahmin” (lower-case) to mean one of

192

sutta nipāta

brahmin parents and caste. Capitalized “Brahmin” refers to one who is
puriﬁed by Dharma practice. In English we can, while not altering the
spelling, change its meaning by using either a capital or lower-case
letter. Note that this is not possible in Indian scripts, which have no
such distinction.
Verse 624 could surprise many brahmins who perform rituals and
ceremonies and are paid for this, as the Buddha denies that one can be a
Brahmin just by carrying out traditional pujas and so on. Such a person
is only a priest. Priests of this sort may recite the rituals in Sanskrit
but not even know the meaning of what they chant. They have learnt
by heart the sounds but not the meaning. Often these ceremonies may
be marked by gabbling the words at high speed. Unfortunately such
behaviour can be found also among some Buddhist monks, equally
bored and ignorant of their traditions.
The Buddha’s verses upon who is a true Brahmin
These (626–653) are found also and nearly identical in the Pāli Dhammapada in the Brāhmaṇavagga. All have the refrain, “one such I say’s a
Brahmin then”. This ideal brahmin, who would be either completely
Awake or far along the Dharma-path to Awakening, illustrates the Buddha’s interpretation of a truly honourable and marvellously spiritual
person. These verses serve in India to remind ordinary brahmins how
they should behave, a high ideal indeed!
A few notes follow upon sundry matters in these verses:
626: The Buddha contrasts ordinary ideas of birth—“born from brahmin mother’s line” with the real Brahmin of “owning nothing
and unattached.”
627: No fetters, no ties, no bonds equals no anxiety, no trembling,
nothing to fear.
628: Freedom from being yoked and so a Buddha.
629: Abuse, torture, imprisonment all endured without anger developing patience as one’s “weapon”.

3.9 to vāseṭṭha

193

630: Basics for becoming a true Brahmin, truly Awake.
631: Water on a lotus-leaf or ﬂower forms into beads like mercury and
runs oﬀ, it never spreads out because of the saponitic surface
of the whole plant. Likewise, a mustard seed drops oﬀ a needle
point.
632: “Exhaustion of all dukkha” means the causes (karma, etc) producing dukkha in the past have been exhausted by good made in the
present. “Laid down the burden” is freedom from all attachment
to the notion “my body” and my mind” and every other sort of
possessiveness.
633: if one practises Dharma one should learn what is the Path and
what is not. Then one should practise accordingly. The “highest
aim” is then not impossible.
634: A verse specially for meditative bhikkhus, munis, or other solitary practitioners. (Solitary practice should only be undertaken
with the advice and approval of one’s Dharma teacher)
635: Force used against other beings, human or other, as well as its use
internally against oneself, can never achieve the good results of
lasting peace. Politicians who advocate violent means to “resolve”
other’s violence and religious fanatics who, driven by wrong
views, preach and practise violence against the followers of sects
or religions diﬀering from their own—all of them are blinded by
delusion and never learn even a little from the facts of human
history. No good comes of violence and even less may be expected
as a result of killing.
636: Specially suitable for one of strong passions! Because one’s character is ﬁery this does not mean that one cannot practice, in fact
the energies of the passions can be turned round into wisdom
and compassion.
637: Mustard seeds which are small still cannot remain upon a needlepoint, so for the practitioner there is no room for lust, hate, conceit, etc.

194

sutta nipāta

638: There are fortunately still people like this in our turbulent world.
When reading this verse, I think with gratitude of Ven. Paññavaḍḍho ācariya, my very kind and wise teacher many years ago.
639: Dharma is the way of giving, generosity and letting-go, quite
diﬀerent to the world’s way of greed, taking, hoarding and selﬁshness.
640: Longings for this world’s joys and properties are common while
longings for the next world are found among the followers of
most religions. The latter feel they are superior to those who
merely long for worldly pleasure and power but their “spiritual”
longing is still an attachment. They must be longingless and free
from bonds”.
641: Until Awakening occurs there is always doubt. “Final knowledge”
(abhiññā/abhijñā) once experienced dissolves away all doubt. The
profound knowledge of deathlessness is another way of saying
this.
642: Some are bound by their tendencies to evil and cause themselves
and others much dukkha. But others are attached to their goodness and sometimes feel themselves superior, looking down upon
those who seem to them not virtuous. This is also a bondage.
643: Love of being means attachment to existence, not being able to
let go of life, even at the time of death. It certainly means, or
implies, more saṁsāric existence, on and on, round and round
turns the saṁsāra wheel.
644: “Wandering-on” is my old translation of saṁsāra which means
literally “wandering and wandering”. The path through saṁsāra
is always diﬃcult because it is guided by delusion, with greed
and hatred too. This is also the fuel which keeps these three ﬁres
burning. When these ﬁres go out (where do they go to? Do ﬁres
“go” anywhere when extinguished?) there is the Cool Peace of
Nirvāṇa.
645: “Homeless one renouncing all”: this could be as a bhikkhu or

3.9 to vāseṭṭha

195

bhikkhunis in monastic community, or as a muni living a solitary life. (On munis see Snp 1.12, 4.9, 4.10, and verses 707–729).
“Renounce” means letting go from the heart, not a forced “renunciation” which will only create inner conﬂicts, tension and
dukkha generally. If practised correctly then all desires subside
by themselves.
646: Craving is consumed by itself with good Dharma practice. It does
not require any force to be used.
647: We all know something of human limitations and attachments,
our bonds in this world. But then we have to know thoroughly
“the bonds of gods”—spiritual bondage such as to the delights
that occur through meditation practice, even bliss. It often happens to those who devote their live to spiritual practice that they
become ensnared by these extra-human experiences, especially
if they follow a teaching that preaches heaven as salvation. From
a Buddhist perspective this is confusion: “heaven(s)” mean the
deva-worlds, some sensual and some of reﬁned spirituality but
all of them as existences in the round of birth and death. “Salvation” is something diﬀerent from the deva-realms, as these
verses point out.
648: “Without assets”: this translation of an-upadhi is Ven. Ñāṇamoli’s
term. Upadhi is a Pāli word with a great range of meaning but
generally refers to what is grasped at, what one is attached to.
Later Commentators have expanded these varieties of upadhi,
as any Buddhist Dictionary will make clear. Think generally of
“assets” as what one assumes that one owns such as mind and
body. One is an “All-worlds conqueror” not by the use of force,
armies and wars, but rather by being free of any attachment to
all of the possible states of existence.
649: This advice is continued from the last verse. Faring well means
practising the Dharma. To fare is one of only two English words
which can convey the meaning of the Pāli verb: carati, both to go

196

sutta nipāta

on a journey, and to practise a spiritual path. The other word is
“to course”.
650: Those Awake, do not “go” anywhere at death, while the ordinary
unenlightened persons do go—to some other existence. The state
of Awakened Ones cannot be explained in words, as no language
exists that has words for what is beyond all words, even all holy
ones.
651: “Ownership before or after or midway”: this has three possible
meanings. First, it has the meaning of unattachment while practising generosity, dāna; one has no regrets about giving either
while planning it, or while actually giving or after having given.
Second, “before” means past lives, “after” refers to future, while
“midway” is this present life. Third refers to the Awakened person of whom it can be said: “owning nothing, and unattached”—
time does not apply since its limitations have been transcended.
652: A list of praiseworthy qualities of those Awake. References to
“heroes” and “conquerors” means those who continue to practise Dharma even in diﬃcult situations, and who “conquer” or
overcome all obstructions. “Washes” refer to one puriﬁed of all
mental-emotional troubles though the Pāli word nhātakaṁ originally meant the ritual puriﬁcatory bathing in rivers by brahmins.
653: This ﬁrst line on “former births” is one of many references in
the Pāli Suttas to lives before this one. Of course they have gone,
they are past and we cannot practise in them. But they did exist
and helped to shape our present existence. Those westerners
who try not to take this into account and who obviously have no
experience of previous existences, distort the Buddha’s teachings. “The waste of births” can also be translated as “exhaustion”,
their cessation because karma no longer exists to cause them to
appear.

3.9 to vāseṭṭha

197

The Buddha’s concluding verses upon “caused by karma”.
The last nine of these verses in this Sutta bring together the various
strands of Dharma taught here. In the ﬁrst of these verses (654) the
Buddha emphasizes how names and families are only conventional
descriptions having no ultimate meaning, they are the only to the
extent that they are accepted within their own language, culture and
convention. As these factors change so will the meaning of names. The
Buddha’s Awakening showed him that the accepted conventions were
sometimes untruthful, even evil and then did not accord with Dharma.
This is why in verse 655 he refers to “those asleep, unquestioning”
who take words and names as ultimate truth. “Taking up views” is a
technical term for those who seize upon beliefs as true, whose beliefs
(views) cannot be veriﬁed and upon a deeper level who blindly follow
the basic view of “I am”. From that ﬂow all other views. In numerous
places in the Sutta the Buddha has shown the evil results of the belief
in “I am”, ranging from mild conﬂicts, round to persecutions, wars and
“racial cleansing”. People, blind like this, not surprisingly by tradition
uphold such views as “one’s a brahmin just by birth.”
Verse 656 puts the Buddhist view: that it is karma not “birth” that
is responsible for one’s status. Were it governed by “birth” there is
nothing could be changed—just grin and bear it. This is in fact the
Hindu position (particularly in the Bhagavadgīta) that those of low
castes should just accept their station in life and work unquestioningly
for high caste people. But the Buddha taught that there are four types
of people: one who goes from dark to dark, one from dark to light, one
from light to dark, one from light to light (AN 4.85). This has nothing
to do with “birth”, whether understood in the brahminical sense, or in
“western” society. There are many historical examples in both of those
who started their lives in poor families but by diligence ended up in
the light, while plenty of cases can be found of those from families of
high repute who yet degenerated due to their internal tendencies to
greed, hatred and delusion, as well as to external conditions.

198

sutta nipāta

The next verse, 657, may raise questions, even eyebrows, even
voices. We learn from the verse that farmers, craftsmen, merchants
and servants have those occupations due to karma, not due to their
societal status or “birth”. This seems to be only a very short skip to
the Hindu caste position of determined occupation due to past karma.
This will not seem unpleasant if one’s present fortunate birth is karmacaused. One has plenty of comforts and easy access to education and
so on. But this takes on a quite diﬀerent aspect if the present birth is
among the poverty-stricken and down-trodden.
I suggest that the Buddha lists these commons occupations of his
times (to which we would add a host of types of work found in our days)
to point out that people choose their preferred work (if they have that
choice) on the basis of vāsanā: This term refers to the repetitive karma
in a past life(s). To examples from my own life: I enjoyed learning
from books and (when found) good teachers though my interests quite
excluded sports and sciences. This vāsanā, tendency or predilection
was part of my character from childhood. So was another tendency to
interest in Ethiopia. None of my family had been there, yet throughout my teens and twenties I met continually people who had lived
in the country—such as a girlfriend who had met the emperor Haile
Selassie—and strengthened this interest. But then the great vāsanā
became apparent. As a British soldier in the Suez Canal Zone doing my
National Service, I read the book Buddhism by Christmas Humphreys
(still in print!) during the course of one day, all 240 pages of it, and at
the end knew without a doubt that I was a Buddhist.
So perhaps the Buddha intended to suggest that people’s occupation
to some extent depends upon these tendencies which draw people
towards not only being farmers, craftsmen, merchants, and servants
but also (658) to being robbers, soldiers, priests, and rulers. It is no
coincidence that these four are found in one Verse.⁶
⁶ Sujato: I interpret this verse diﬀerently. I think there is a play on two meanings of
kamma: as well as meaning “ethical choices” especially in past lives, it commonly
means simply “work”. So the Buddha is saying that we are not distinguished by our

3.9 to vāseṭṭha

199

Verses 659–670: Karma as a process, a very complex one, does really
work in the mind and can by advanced practitioners be seen and known.
This means that it is not a theory or mere belief. One of the six True
Knowledges possessed by the Buddha was the Knowledge of others’
karma and results, and since his time many famous Teachers have
had this ability. “Seers of causal relatedness” refers to those who see
Dependent Origination for themselves. “People by karma circle round”
means that they continue to go round the Wheel of birth and death,
while “beings are by karma bound” means that the vast majority of
them have no choice about where they will go in their next existence.
That has already been decided by the predominant sorts of karmas that
they have “made”. The only beings to have any choice in this are those
upon the path—streamwinners or Bodhisattvas. The surety about this
is reinforced by the simile: the well-secured linchpin that holds the
chariot’s wheel to the axle. New karma in a diﬀerent direction can
sometimes block out, though probably not dissolve, karma completely.
To encourage the young brahmins so that they did not feel that
their futures were deterministically limited the Buddha spoke the next
verse showing them what they had to practise. “Ardour” (tapo) was
a word well-known to brahmins. To them it meant, and still means,
some sort of austerity, sometimes very severe self-torture aimed at
puriﬁcation according to Hindus but disapproved of by the Buddha.
In the Buddha’s Dharma tapo means making an eﬀort, even if this is
diﬃcult and involves renunciation. It should not involve the harm of
oneself. “Good Life” (brahmacariya) is a life based on Dharma of moral
conduct (sīla), meditation (samādhi) and wisdom (paññā, prajñā). It
may or may not involve celibacy and the adoption of a monastic life, or
a solitary one (muni). With this and with “restraint and taming” one
becomes a true Brahmin, that is, Awakened.
To elaborate upon this, verse 662 mentions the triple true knowledges (vijjā, vidyā) which meant quite diﬀerent things to brahmins and
acts in past lives, but by what we “do” (i.e. our kamma) in this life.

200

sutta nipāta

to Buddhists. Brahmins understood tevijjā to mean complete knowledge of the Three Vedas, their most ancient “scriptures”. (As they were
learnt by heart and chanted, not written down, they should really be
called “chanters”). Buddhists understood these words to mean:
1. Memory of one’s previous births (lives);
2. The divine eye—ability to see distant events, people, etc.;
3. The exhaustion of the inﬂows (āsava), the inﬂows of kāma (sensual desire), the inﬂow for continued existence, and the inﬂow of
(holding) views. Sometimes a fourth inﬂow is added: the inﬂow
of ignorance.
“Possessed of Triple Knowledges”, which are not “possessed” in the
normal sense, as there is by that time no one to possess them, goes along
with “Peace”; not merely the peace experienced by a good meditator,
but Awakening’s Peace. “Repeated being”—desire for more existence—
is exhausted with no desire either for it or against it.
The last part of the verse compares a person with these attainments
to Brahmā and Sakra. As the two important Hindu devas would be
revered by their followers, so should an Awakened one be treated. This
is rather an interesting end to these verses, an end specially spoken by
the Buddha to inspire them as brahmins to practise the Dharma.

3.10

To Kokāliya on the Results of Slander
Kokāliya Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Radiant One was dwelling at Jeta’s Grove in the
park of Anāthapiṇḍika near Sāvatthī. Now at that time the bhikkhu
Kokāliya approached the Radiant One, and having done so saluted him
and sat down to one side. Seated there Kokāliya bhikkhu said this to
the Radiant One: “Sir, Sāriputta and Moggallāna are of evil desires,
under the inﬂuence of evil desires.”
When this was said the Radiant One spoke to the bhikkhu Kokāliya:
“Don’t say this Kokāliya, don’t say so! Clear your mind towards Sāriputta
and Moggallāna for they are very friendly.” A second time Kokāliya
repeated his allegation and the Radiant One replied in the same way.
An even a third time Kokāliya spoke his accusation and the Radiant
One replied.
After this the bhikkhu Kokāliya rose from his seat, saluted the
Radiant One and circumambulating him, keeping him on the right,
departed. Only a short time after he left, Kokāliya’s whole body broke
out in boils the size of mustard seeds, then grew to the size of greengram, then to chickpeas, then to jujube seeds, then to jujube fruits,
then to myrobalan fruits, then to young bael fruits, then to mature
bael fruits, and when they had reached this size all over his body, blood
and pus was discharged and Kokāliya died. After death, he appeared
in the Paduma Hell as a result of hardening his heart against Sāriputta
and Moggallāna.
Then as the night passed, Brahmā Sahampati of great radiance
illuming the whole of Jetavana, came to the Radiant One and after
saluting him stood to one side and said this: “Venerable, the bhikkhu
Kokāliya has died and appeared subsequently in the Paduma Hell as a
result of hardening his heart against Sāriputta and Moggallāna.”
When this was said, a certain bhikkhu spoke to the Radiant One

202

sutta nipāta

thus: “How long, venerable, is life in the Paduma Hell?”
“Bhikkhu, life in the Paduma hell is surely long, not easy to reckon
in terms of years, of hundreds of years, of thousand of years, in tens of
hundreds of thousands of years.”
“But can a simile be made, sir?”
“It can, bhikkhu. Suppose that there was a Kosalan cartload of
twenty measures of sesame seed, and that from this a man might take
a single seed every century. That Kosalan cartload of twenty measures
of sesame seeds would be more quickly used up in that way than would
a lifetime in the Paduma Hell. Moreover, bhikkhu, there are twenty
lifetimes in the Abbuda Hell to equal one in Nirabbuda Hell … twenty
in Nirabbuda to equal one Ababa … twenty in Ababa to equal one Aṭaṭa
… twenty in Aṭaṭa to equal one Ahaha … twenty in Ahaha equal to
one Kumuda … one Sogandhika … one Uppālaka … one Puṇḍarīka
… one Paduma. It is in Paduma that Kokāliya bhikkhu has arisen for
hardening his heart against Sāriputta and Moggallāna.
The Radiant One spoke thus and having said this spoke further
(these verses).
For every person come to birth,
an axe is born within their mouths,
with which these fools do chop themselves
when uttering evil speech.

₆₆₃

Who praises one deserving blame,
or blames that one deserving praise,
ill-luck does tear by means of mouth
and from such ill no happiness ﬁnds.

₆₆₄

Triﬂing the unlucky throw,
by dice destroying wealth,
even all one’s own, even oneself as well;
compared to that greater “throw”—
the thinking ill of Sugatas.

₆₆₅

3.10 to kokāliya

203

Having maligned the Noble Ones
with voice and mind directing ill,
one then arrives at (self-made) hell,
of millions of aeons (slow to end).

₆₆₆

With one denying truth there goes to hell
that one who having done, says “I did not”.
Humans having made such karmas base,
equal are they in the other world.

₆₆₇

Whoso oﬀends the inoﬀensive one,
who’s innocent and blameless, both,
upon that fool does evil fall,
as ﬁne dust ﬂung against the wind.

₆₆₈

That person prone to coveting
will speak of others in dispraise—
one faithless and ill-mannered too,
jealous, set on slandering.

₆₆₉

One foul mouthed, of baseless talk,
ignoble, treacherous, evil, doing
wrong deeds, luckless, ill-begotten human scum—
Speak little here! Or else hell-dweller be!

₆₇₀

Dirt do you scatter for your own happiness
whenever you revile those who are good,
faring through the world many evils you have done,
in the long night falling down a precipice.

₆₇₁

No one’s karma is destroyed,
truly as Master it returns;
so the foolish misery bring
upon themselves in future time.

₆₇₂

204

sutta nipāta
Bashed by bars of iron,
iron spikes’ edges bite,
and the food appropriately is
like white-hot balls of iron.

₆₇₃

And softly speak no speakers there,
they hasten not to help nor to safety lead,
they enter all-directions ﬁre,
on burning ember-mats they lie.

₆₇₄

Tangled they are in ﬁery nets,
and pounded there with hammers of iron,
and led, immersed, through darkness blind,
spreading in all directions.

₆₇₅

And enter they in iron cauldrons aﬁre,
in which for long they’re stowed;
rising up and sinking down,
bubbling in masses of ﬁre.

₆₇₆

There the evil-doers cook
in a mixed stew of blood and pus;
to whatever direction they turn,
there they fester at the touch.

₆₇₇

Then the evil-doers cook
in worm-infested waters;
and cannot ﬂee for there are sides,
vast vessels with all surfaces concavities.

₆₇₈

There looms the sharp-edged Swordleaf scrub—
they enter and their limbs are slashed;
and there with hooks their tongues are seized,
pulled to and fro, they’re beaten up.

₆₇₉

3.10 to kokāliya

205

They draw near Vetaraṇī Creek,
biting and bladed, hard to cross;
there headlong down the foolish fall—
these evil-doers evil done.

₆₈₀

Then while they wail, the mottled ﬂocks
of ebon ravens them devour;
jackals, hounds, great vultures, hawks,
and crows rend them and ravage there.

₆₈₁

Misery unmitigated, this mode of life,
which evil-doers get to see,
therefore let one in life’s remainder be
not careless, one who does what should be done.

₆₈₂

Those who know reckon the term
of these in the Paduma Hell in loads
of sesame, ﬁve myriad lakhs of seeds
and then, twelve hundred lakhs beside.

₆₈₃

Thus are Hell’s many ills here told,
and terms that must be spent there too;
towards, therefore, those praiseworthy,
the friendly, pure—guard both words and thoughts.

₆₈₄

(Snp 663–684)

Some reﬂections on “Hell”
There are a few Pāli texts on this subject, but the present Sutta is the
only one found in the Sutta Nipāta. The subject of the hell-realms
is rare when compared to the vast recorded teachings of the Buddha.
Mention of it occurs always in the context of some serious wrongdoing,
for peccadilloes do not result in the experience of hell.

206

sutta nipāta

Another point to consider is that as “all conditioned things are impermanent” (sabbe saṅkhārā aniccā), hell certainly is conditioned by
the causes that have led to its suﬀering, so it is impermanent, as are
all other forms of existence. In this it diﬀers from the hell of theistic
religions which they sometimes have proclaimed as eternal. Buddhist
teachings could not agree that impermanent cause, even the slaughter
of millions of men, could have permanent results, so even such monsters as Hitler, Stalin, and Ma-tse-tun could not suﬀer hell forever.
However, all texts are agreed that it continues for a very long time.
“Hell” is not a translation of niraya favoured by some because of the
eternalistic overtone, which does not apply to the Buddhist meaning,
and so prefer “purgatory”. I have used “hell” as it is a direct and brief
term ﬁtting well into verse, and applicable to both the great suﬀerings
experienced by evil-doers.
The wrong-doer in this Sutta is a bhikkhu called Kokāliya (in the
Sutta Nipāta), or Kokālika (in other Pāli texts). In any case his name
means “one from the town of Kokāli”. His story, the essence of which
is his slander of the Buddha’s chief disciples, Sāriputta and Moggallāna, in the presence of the Buddha, saying that these two enlightened
monks were of “evil desires, and they are inﬂuenced by evil desires”.
Presumably he repeated this allegation to others as well. According to
the texts this resulted in a plague of boils all over his body. We could
speculate whether modern medicine could or could not ﬁnd a cure
for these, but the Pāli commentators presumably would deny that any
cure was possible as the aﬄiction was brought about by evil karma.
Then Kokāliya died of his illness and the text relates that he went immediately in hell. As this frightful experience is usually connected with
great anger and violence, though in this case it seems to be motivated
by envy, and because this touches upon a doctrine of the heavy results
of doing evil to the Nobles ones (ariya), it should be examined in brief.
This teaching, found in its fullest development in the Pāli Commentaries, assigns degrees of painful karmic results according to the

3.10 to kokāliya

207

attainment of the recipients. Thus, injuring a Buddha causes in the
wrongdoer the worst and longest suﬀerings while attacking ordinary
persons, including monks and nuns will not have such bad consequences, with all shades of karma results between. This is a questionable doctrine as explained below and may lead us to doubt whether we
should accept this Sutta as the Buddha-word or not.
The Buddha’s teaching on Karma is clear and straightforward. A
decision in the mind is mental karma, a decision to speak and one has
made vocal karma and if this is followed by deliberate action this is
called bodily karma, the last two are of course guided by mind. These
three actions or karmas may be motivated by greed, hatred and delusion, in which case they are called “unwholesome karma”, the results
of which will be painful, or by non-greed (= generosity), non-hatred
(loving-kindness and compassion), or by non-delusion (= wisdom), in
which case such karma is called “wholesome”, and the results of it to
be experienced sooner or later will be pleasant. The initial decision to
think, say and do is taken in the mind and the following results are
experienced as happiness or suﬀering in both mind and body. This
Sutta concerns unwholesome karma with painful results.
Then, there is also this teaching, albeit rather uncommon in the Pāli
Suttas, that good karma made towards Enlightened persons has much
greater results for the doer, than good expressed towards ordinary
people, who of course may include beggars or other poverty stricken or
ill people. Such emphasis, found in the Pāli Commentaries and much in
evidence in Buddhist countries, means that those who are supposed to
be enlightened or on their way to Enlightenment receive very generous
donations, while care of the poor, the diseased, the criminal and the
mad receive little, as the doer’s merit will be insigniﬁcant because
these people are not puññavanta—those possessing merit. This cannot
be correct! Suppose a good-hearted person wishes to alleviate the
suﬀerings of those poor people, doing this out of loving-kindness and
compassion, one cannot say that his or her merit will be little. Why?

208

sutta nipāta

Because this person is compassionate, with good intentions.
In the case of Kokāliya he is said to have uttered envious and untruthful words about the two enlightened disciples in the Buddha’s
presence. Result; a frightful disease followed by a long stay in exceedingly uncomfortable surroundings. Had he uttered the same words
about an ordinary fellow-monk or lay-supporter, presumably his karmic
result would have been quite insigniﬁcant. Does this sound like the
rational teaching of karma and its results? No, because there is an unexplained and probably inexplicable cause or condition involving the
noble attainments of the great disciples, which condition has seriously
lengthened his terrible karmic results.
It is proper to mention here that the other side of this doctrine,
doing good towards noble disciples, such as great generosity by donors,
has also a deleterious result. As they are reputed to be Awakened, such
Teachers attract lay-donors who wish to make merit, sure that their
gifts will bring them good results in the future. These Teachers are
then showered by gifts which have no place in their lives, and which
may be diﬃcult for them to dispose of.
Summing up this point; the doctrine of variable results of karma
according to the recipient’s spiritual status is at least questionable
though widely believed in. It may be objected that the Dharma’s working are not mechanistic or totally rational. This is true for the Dharma
in some aspects transcends rationalism, as for example the presence
of supernormal powers in some living teachers or the bodily relics in
the ashes of some great teacher’s cremation.
Hell’s depictions in many religious traditions have remarkable
similarities. Such murals and paintings on cloth and in books are usually explained as eﬀorts to evoke fear of retribution among evildoers.
Whether such pictures are successful or not the writer does not know,
though controlling the impulses to evil by invoking fear cannot be
the best way of teaching people Dharma. But he does know that the
teacher Acharn Singthong, in N.E. Thailand, controlled an outbreak

3.10 to kokāliya

209

of rustling water-buﬀalo in the locality by such means. This Teacher,
highly respected by the villagers, gave to them on a Full Moon night a
sermon lasting about three hours on the hell-realms. The audience of
monks, nuns and laypeople, were spellbound and no one even changed
position on the hard boards of the ﬂoor of Wat Pa Geow’s hall. One
could have heard a pin drop. Buﬀalo-rustling ceased immediately. Perhaps it is true then that some people will only practise the Dharma
after being scared of the results of evil-doing.
As a matter related to this Sutta it should be remembered that
without the operation of the senses and the assembling of knowledge
by mind there are no worlds, indeed, no existences. So when people
raise the question, “Hells? Where are they?” the answer is that they
exist where all worlds exist, including the one that we are aware of
now, in the mind. One does not have to go anywhere to reach hell, just
make the appropriate karma and hell is here. It can continue to be here
(where else would it be?) when an evildoer dies. Just as we make our
own karmas to produce and continue with human life, so it is with
other possibilities for existence, including hell. “The mind goes before
all dharmas” as the famous ﬁrst verse of the Dhammapada says.
Moving on now to examine the Sutta’s structure, its composite
nature soon becomes obvious. Kokāliya’s story and some of the verses
here (Snp 663–666) have been popular and are preserved also at SN
6.10 and at AN 10.89. This seems to be the earliest version around which
other material has been added. For instance, Snp 667–668 are also Dhp
306 & 125, while the remaining verses, Snp 669–684, are an addition
found only in Snp. These sixteen verses may be the work of one author
who has written them in an unusual metre.
Particular points raised in the Sutta
In the introductory prose there is an example of a verbal convention in
the Buddha’s days: that of repeating a question or statement three times
and receiving an answer also thrice repeated. In this case Kokāliya

210

sutta nipāta

repeats his allegations against the chief disciples three times while
the Buddha warns him not to accuse them as they are “very friendly”.
Indians in those days, not only Buddhists, according to the Pāli Suttas seemed to regard this thrice-repeated, statement or question as
bringing to a head or ﬁnally resolving the matter in hand. This could
be illustrated in this way:
• Statement/accusation
• Reply/warning
• x 3 = karmic result for speaker.
Another example, Sela questioning Keṇiya (Snp 3.7):
• Did you say “Buddha?”
• Yes, I said “Buddha”
• x 3 = result: Sela and disciples went to the Buddha and were
awakened.
Many more may be found in other Sutta collections. After Kokāliya
has spoken three times against the pair of chief disciples and been
reprimanded for this by the Buddha, he is recorded to have done a
rather astonishing thing. Not only does he pay his respects to the
Buddha (by lotussing his hands and bowing down probably from the
standing position), but also as a greater mark of respect still he departs
keeping the Buddha on his right side, that is, circumambulating him in
a clockwise direction. Of course we shall never know if this is merely a
commonly repeated phrase in Pāli, or whether the miscreant Kokāliya
actually did so. Though he could have done this out of mockery of the
usual conventions of reverence, it could also be that his enmity was
not at all directed at the Buddha, but an obsession directed to the chief
disciples.
Kokāliya’s death through increasingly large “boils” needs a note
upon the seeds and fruit they are compared to. Mustard seeds are very
small, less than a thirty-secondth of an inch across. Green-grain is

3.10 to kokāliya

211

one of a family of similar pulses which can be used for making dahl.
Chickpeas are also a familiar ingredient of Indian cookery to this day
but being covered with boils of this size—up to one half-inch diameter,
would already be very serious. Jujube fruit kernels would be larger
assuming that this means what is now known as “Chinese dates” are in
fact Zizyphus jujuba and the whole fruit larger still. Myrobalan (Terminalia species from India) produces an astringent fruit widely used in
Ayurveda, and by Buddhist monks, the green fruit exceeding at least
two jujubes. Bael (bilva in Pāli) is a tree in the Citrus family producing
a good-tasting digestive ﬂesh which is reached only by cracking a hard
shell. Fruits vary in size from small ones easily held in one hand to
“two-handers”. One shudders to think of “boils” of this size.
Another matter worth noting is the use of Brahmā Sahampati as
messenger of Kokāliya’s fate. He serves to reinforce the Buddha’s authority as the supposed utterer of this Sutta. He is pictured as appearing to the Buddha in the last hours of the night and telling him what
had happened to Kokāliya. After his disappearance the Buddha then
relays this information to the bhikkhus and explains, in answer to a
question, about the length of life in the Paduma Hell.
This is then explained, supposedly by the Buddha, in a complex
piece of Buddhist arithmetic, all of which may be summed up by a
more convenient expression in English as “a very, very long time”.
The combination of Brahmā Sahampati’s appearance and the Buddha’s
“mathematical” calculations and the subsequent verses upon the horrors of hell may give us pause for thought when it comes to this Sutta’s
authenticity.
Various translators introduce into these verses the term “warders
of hell” for which there is no word in the Pāli text. These are perhaps assumed to exist and if this is so—certainly later Buddhist texts assume
that such “warders” exist—then it raises a question. The inhabitants
of the various states of existence including this human one, have appeared there (or here) due to the karma that they have created—so

212

sutta nipāta

much is clear. But what are we to understand about “warders” who
are said to intensify the suﬀerings of the inmates, as though they were
commercially frying ﬁsh and chips, ﬂipping them over and stirring
them round in boiling oil? Are these supposed “warders” present because they too have made much evil karma? But why should they have
power over other inmates? One assumption is that they indeed have
made such karma. Another, more subtle explanation is that the perception of “warders” by the inmates like the rest of the hellish landscape,
is mind-made by the latter. This properly solves the presence of hellish
“devils” as depicted not only in Buddhist art but in Christian murals
also.
From verse 669 to the Sutta’s conclusion I have based my translation
upon E.M. Hare’s verses and occasionally used whole lines of his, as he
has often struck an appropriately colourful or gory note.

3.11

The Sages Asita and Nālaka and the Buddha’s
advice
Nālaka Sutta

Prologue—Telling the story
narrator

In midday meditation
brilliantly arrayed
happy and joyful
with Sakka their superior
Then when he had seen
respectfully he greeted them

the sage Asita saw
the thrice-ten deva troop,
waving ﬂags the while,
₆₈₅
all highly elated.
the devas so delighted
and questioned them like this:

asita

Why is this deva-Saṅgha
they’ve brought along banners
Even when the devas
with a win for deva-hosts,
then was no such celebration—
What wonder have they heard?
They whistle and they sing,
with dancing and with music,
O you deva-dwellers
I beg you, good sirs,

so exceedingly joyful
for brandishing about?
battled anti-gods
and loss for demon-hordes,
so what have devas seen?
Why devas are delighted?
clap hands and strum sitars;
so they celebrate.
on Meru’s airy peaks,
soon dispel my doubts.

₆₈₆

₆₈₇

₆₈₈

devas

A Bodhisattva has been born
in lands along Lumbini.
for the weal and welfare
That’s why we’re delighted

in the Sakyans’ city,
Precious gem beyond compare,
of those in the human realm.
₆₈₉
and completely overjoyed.⁷

214

sutta nipāta

He, best being of all,
mighty bull among men,
will revolve the wheel
likened to a roaring lion,

foremost among mankind,
of creatures all supreme,
in ancient seers’ woods,
mightiest of beasts.

₆₉₀

narrator

Having known this news,
in mind descended to
sat he down and said:

then the sage in haste
Suddhodana’s abode,

asita

Where then is this prince?

I wish to see him now!

narrator

So Sakyans he beseeched.
Then to him Asita named
the prince in colour clear
burnished and illustrious both
Joy with rapture great
on perceiving this young prince,
pure like the lunar lord
dazzling as the sun
Sky beings all above
of many-tiered parasols
but no one saw the bearers
The sage with dreadlocked hair,
seeing then the prince—
white parasols of state
received him in his arms with
As soon as he received
he, skilled in lore of signs
exclaimed:

₆₉₁
did Sakyans show their son,
as rays from shining gold,
₆₉₂
of supernal hue.
ﬁlled Asita’s heart
bright as crested ﬂame,
stars herding through the sky,
₆₉₃
on cloudless autumn days.
carried canopy of state
as well as gold-handled whisks—
₆₉₄
of the whisks and parasols.
also Kaṇhasiri called,
golden jewel upon brocade,
held above his head—
₆₉₅
gladdened mind and joy.
the foremost Sakyan man,
and mastery of mantras,

3.11 the sages asita and nālaka

215

asita

Highest, unexcelled

among the race of men!

₆₉₆

narrator

But recollected then
Seeing the sobbing prince,

that soon, so soon, he’d die.
the Sakyans asked of him:

sakyans

Surely for this prince

no peril will befall?

₆₉₇

narrator

The sage in answer said

to anxious Sakyan’s throng:

asita

“No fears do I foresee
nor any harm at all
nor he’s unfortunate,
for he will touch upon
and turn the Dharma wheel.
with compassion for the many,
But I’ve only brief
while in this time I’ll die,
the Dharma of that one
this saddens me so,

to come upon the prince,
in future will befall,
₆₉₈
so do not be depressed,
Enlightenment divine
Seer of perfect purity,
he will set forth the goodly life. ₆₉₉
time left within my life,
having no chance to hear
of power incomparable;
₇₀₀
such loss distresses me.”

narrator

Having roused in Sakyans
keeper of pure precepts,
Then of his compassion
arousing in him interest

this joy profound, the sage,
left inner palace suites.
to his sister’s son set out,
in the Dharma deep:

₇₀₁

216

sutta nipāta

asita

From persons having heard
who Sambodhi attained,
go there, then question him,
Practice with that radiant lord

the sound of “Buddha” word
practising the Dharma-path,
as his disciples live with him.
precepts of purity.

₇₀₂

narrator

So, instructed by him,
who foresaw in future time
that Nālaka, his nephew
with guarded senses waited
Having heard of the victor’s
he went to him and saw him,
and trust arose in him
Then he enquired upon
thus coming to fulﬁl

nālaka

buddha

whose mind set on beneﬁt,
perfect purity complete,
much merit stored away,
₇₀₃
in expectation of the victor.
revolution of the noble wheel,
that prime among the saviours,
in the greatest sage.
the Silentness supreme,
₇₀₄
the sages wish.

Having understood Asita’s speech—
that it accords with truthfulness,
Gotama, we question you
on dharmas gone to the further shore.

₇₀₅

I came to homelessness but now I wish
as a bhikkhu to behave,
speak to me, Sage, as I request
on the highest state of Silentness.

₇₀₆

Knowledge of Silence I’ll convey,
hard to do, to master diﬃcult,
so be both ﬁrm and resolute
and I’ll speak upon this thing.

₇₀₇

3.11 the sages asita and nālaka

217

In town there’s always praise and blame,
so practise even-mindedness,
guard against faults of mind—
fare calm and free from arrogance.

₇₀₈

As crown-ﬁre crests
and forest-fuel ﬂies up,
so do women tempt the sage—
but be not by them tempted.

₇₀₉

Refrain from sexual dharmas,
whether pleasures ﬁne or coarse,
be not attached, repelled,
for beings weak or strong.

₇₁₀

Comparing others with oneself—
“As I am so are they” and
“As they are so am I”—
kill not nor cause to kill.

₇₁₁

Wishes and greed give up to which
ordinary persons are attached,
be one-with-vision and set out
to go across this hellish state.

₇₁₂

Empty-bellied, with little food,
few in wishes, greedless too,
the wishless he, and hungerless,
the wishless come quite Cool.

₇₁₃

The sage on almsround having walked,
going then to lonely woods
and drawing near the roots of a tree,
takes a seat just there.

₇₁₄

218

sutta nipāta
Firmly intent on jhāna
and delighting in the woods;
who at the tree-roots meditates,
satisﬁes himself.

₇₁₅

Until the end of night,
when to a village he goes,
there, by gifts not pleased
nor by invitations.

₇₁₆

The sage to village come,
hastens not among the houses,
but cuts oﬀ talk while seeking food,
and refrains from hints.

₇₁₇

“Good it is that I have gained”,
“good that I have not as well”.
One such thinks both alike
returning to his tree.

₇₁₈

Going about with bowl in hand
not dumb but others think him so;
he does not scorn a triﬂing gift,
nor despise its donor.

₇₁₉

Reﬁned and basic practices
the Samaṇa’s made clear;
but Beyond with both they not go,
nor through one only experience.

₇₂₀

In whom no craving’s left—
that bhikkhu cut across the stream,
“should do, should not do”, given up,
in him no fever’s found.

₇₂₁

3.11 the sages asita and nālaka

219

Further than this, wisdom still I teach:
Be like a razor’s edge,
tongue-tip upon the palate,
thus be restrained in belly.

₇₂₂

Be not indolent in mind,
but neither think too much,
and be free from all carrion-stench:
aim at life of purity.

₇₂₃

Train yourself in solitary life,
the way of life of samaṇas,
take high delight in being one
its called the Singleness.

₇₂₄

With this you will shine forth
in all directions ten,
then the praises of the wise, those skilled
in meditation—sensuality let go,
as one loving me, you’ll all the more
grow in faith and modesty.

₇₂₅

Know this from waters’ ﬂow—
those by rocks and pools—
such rills and becks gush noisily,
great waterways ﬂow quiet.

₇₂₆

What is unﬁlled makes noise
but silent is what’s full,
the fool is like the pot half-ﬁlled,
the wise one’s like a lake that’s full.

₇₂₇

When a samaṇa speaks much
full of goodness and meaning:

220

sutta nipāta
Knowing Dharma he speaks,
Knowing he speaks so much.

₇₂₈

But who, Knowing, is self-restrained,
Knowing, he speaks not much:
That Sage is worth to Silence,
a Sage to Silence reached.⁸

₇₂₉
(Snp 685–729)

Notes upon Sundry Words
Subjects commented upon are bolded.
The Prologue
This visionary beginning to the Sutta has been translated rather into
the form of alliterative Anglo-Saxon verse, perhaps not very successfully. Whether that is so or not, a few matters deserve to be explained
to the reader or chanter.
The Sage Asita appears rarely in Pāli Suttas but was an important
and well known person of those days. Obviously well-practised in jhāna
he had access through his meditation to visions and other worlds. On
this occasion he saw the “Thirty-three” (sometimes called the 30; for the
Pāli legend about them, see the Dhammapada Commentary translated
as Buddhist Legends, volume 3, p.315 ﬀ.). This realm of devas had a leader
usually called Sakka (Skt. Sakra, also Inda/Indra) who according to
the Suttas became a devoted disciple of the Buddha. Naturally, Asita
wanted to know why these devas were jubilant and so enquired.
He mentions a war with the anti-gods fought by these devas at
some past time. Yes, as this is still the Kāma-world, there is war even
though it is a heaven! Kāma, even when it is subtle, still produces
⁸ Sujato: lkm’s translation of the following verse did not bring out the subtle diﬀerence between this verse and the previous; compare Norman’s translation. I have
adjusted it slightly.

3.11 the sages asita and nālaka

221

conﬂict. “Anti-gods” is a translation of the Pāli a + sura, which literally
means “not + god”. There are many stories about the asuras and their
quarrelsome nature.
The Thirty-three devas are celebrating the birth of our Bodhisatta,
the prince Siddhattha who later became the Buddha of our times. After
his enlightenment beneath the Bodhi tree, he “revolved the Wheel”
of the Dharma (Dhamma-cakka-pavattana). This phrase has a deﬁnite
meaning beyond the fact that he “taught Dharma”. The Wheel, seen
on so many temples, images, sculptures, ﬂags and so on throughout
the Buddhist world, is a symbol of movement, something that is not
static. Originally a symbol used by the greater Indian monarchs as
a sign of their power and authority, it was tamed by the Buddha to
represent the power for good of the Dharma which would increase both
in its exterior presence in this world through such things as temples,
monks and nuns, but increase also in the student’s mind for his or her
comfort. Unlike the usual run of royalty (and these days, presidents),
Dharma conquers not by violence but through its innate truthfulness,
through its advocation of loving kindness and compassion. The Wheel
of Dharma always revolves because that truthfulness is always true
though the present Buddha’s teaching of it may in time be forgotten.
Hence it is known as the Saccadhamma—the truthful Dharma which
applies everywhere and at all times. A Buddha may be said to give the
wheel a heave to keep it running!
The phrase under discussion here occurs three times in this Sutta
and has been rendered as “revolve the wheel”, “turn the Dharmawheel” and “revolution of the noble wheel”.
Lunar Lord a few verses further on is a fancy name for the moon
and his herding of the stars through the sky—charming poetry.
The panoply of state, the parasols held above rulers and the yak-tail
ﬂy-whisks and so on that traditionally accompany a rajah—possibly
now found only in Thailand—are pictured in these verses, an ancient
tradition indeed. The author was a bhikkhu in Thailand at the time of

222

sutta nipāta

King Bhumibol Adulyadej’s Fourth Cycle; 4 x 12 = 48 years old) when
he processed round the capital with right royal traditional splendour.
All shops were closed and no one gazed out from upstairs windows
or balconies but pavements were packed and silent with no cheering
or clapping. The procession of elephants with the king mounted upon
the ﬁrst accompanied by royal retainers in traditional Thai costume
was very impressive. Such precious articles as parasols and whisks,
as described in the Sutta, were much in evidence and solemnity of
the occasion emphasized by the crowd’s silence. It was broken only
by a single walking oﬃcial playing a tiny instrument, the high notes
of which were punctuated every few steps by the single beat together
of twenty-four drums. Altogether an awe-inspiring event, with the
monarch dismounting from his massive elephant to visit the various
temples upon his route and pay homage there.
Returning more strictly to the Sutta, note that the Buddha throughout Snp is referred to as a Jina (Victor or Conqueror) of whatever it is
in ourselves which prevents the Seeing of things-as-they-really-are.
This occurs here in a passage of narrative, as the Buddha generally does
not call himself by this title. (Jina is also used by Jains, that is “followers
of the Jinas”, as a title for their supreme teachers). The Buddha however
does refer to himself as a Tathāgata (One who has come from/gone to
Thusness), or a Samaṇa (One who’s at peace/equanimous).
In the same narrative passage Asita enquires about the Silentness
supreme. This one translator’s eﬀort to render moneyyaṁ, an abstract
noun connected with muni, a sage. Other renderings are “best of sagehoods”, “highest wisdom” and “still wisdom’s crown”, while the Pāli
has moneyyaṁ uttamaṁ padam. Muni is a tricky word to translate into
English. Its best known context in English is as an epithet of the Buddha: Śākyamuni or Shākyamuni. In Pāli it is Sakyamuni and usually
translated as Sage of the Sakiyas. It is also well-known in a Sanskrit
mantra: Om muni muni mahāmuni śākyamuniye svaha. In this book muni
is translated, “Sage”.

3.11 the sages asita and nālaka

223

But to say this does not exhaust the meaning of muni which cannot in fact be translated by one word. This is because the root of this
word is also connected to silence—the deliberate Hindu practice of
not-speaking, and hence to the development of wisdom. In the Vinayapiṭaka an incident is recorded in which some bhikkhus make a pact
not to speak to each other during their three months of Rains-retreat.
When this was ﬁnished and they journeyed to meet the Buddha he
enquired how they had practised and they told him of their deliberate
silence: he reproved them for this, calling their practice acting like
animals. They should not behave so but should communicate, he said,
gladdening each other with Dharma.⁹ This silent practice in Skt. is
called mauna or in Pāli mona. It seems that the Buddha disapproved
of this common Indian practice counting it as an extreme action not
ﬁtting those who practised the Middle Way. It is obviously diﬀerent if
solitary meditators practise silence. This sort of silence, moneyyaṁ or
mona, is really inner silence, not struggling with oneself not to talk,
naturally not talking if there is no good reason to do so, and it arises
from a kind of wisdom gone beyond words. This kind of wisdom is
expressed through the verb munāti—to be one-with-silent-wisdom,
or a mum, a silent sage. All this should be borne in mind (!) when the
word “sage” is seen in this translation.
Coming to verse 711, note its last line, “kill not nor cause to kill”.
A similar theme and the same refrain is found in Dhp 129–130.
The next verse in Pāli contains the word cakkhumā or “one-withvision” which is literally one-with-eyes. See AN 3.29.
Shortly after we arrive at verse 720, which is accompanied in my
manuscript translation with an exclamatory, “Note!” This is a warning
that this diﬃcult verse is translated in diﬀerent ways by E.M Hare, H.
Saddhatissa, K.R. Norman with I.B Homer, as well as W. Rahula, and
N.A. Jayawickrama. Some of these versions, though they have been
printed, make no sense or are mere literal versions word by word. One
⁹ Sujato: See my note to Snp 1.12.

224

sutta nipāta

or two of them resort to the Pāli Commentary’s involved “explanation”.
The present translation tries to make sense of the Pāli, (could there be
an ancient corruption?) just as it stands.
The ﬁrst line contains the word uccāvaṁ which most of the above
translators have rendered “high and low”. However, as this refers
to Dharma practices, while “high” ones does not sound out of place,
surely it is inappropriate to talk of “low” ones. Hence my translation
of “reﬁned and basic”.
The Samaṇa in the second line is the Buddha talking modestly of
himself, since samaṇa was a common term for wandering monks. But
this samaṇa did not just teach these two types of practices but made
them clear, clariﬁed them or illuminated them. The Pāli verb pakāsita
has this meaning of shining, clarifying.
The second two lines have confounded all the above translators
and the only advantage of this one is that it does make sense, though
whether it represents the original meaning will be for future scholars
to decide. The words digunaṁ and ekagunaṁ have, in the previous
translations, been rendered “twice” and “once” but I have used “both”
and “one” which makes better sense. Now, I assume that the verse
concerns the two sorts of practice mentioned in the ﬁrst two lines.
The second two seem to mean that practitioners, only referred to with
“they”, do not go to the Beyond, that is Liberation or Nirvāṇa, by means
of either, both sorts of practices, nor with only one sort. What does
this mean? This explanation seems best: some people think that only
one sort of practice is needed—either the reﬁned or the basic; others
assume that both are required, the reﬁned and the basic. Both these
people hold a view about practice and while they do so neither will
successfully ﬁnd the Beyond. They will not ﬁnd it as they have not let
go of their views.
But even this explanation still begs the question: what is basic practice and what, reﬁned? Asking this question assumes that uccāvaca
has this meaning of high/low, or basic/reﬁned. It can also mean “vari-

3.11 the sages asita and nālaka

225

ous”. Basic (or “low”) might refer to the various ways of making merit
(puñña)—for these see Ten Ways of Making Merit (dasa-puñña-kiryavatthu) in the Commentary to the Udāna, or in the ﬁfth chapter of the
Upāsakajanālaṁkāra. Both works can be obtained from the Pāli Text
Society, but neither has been translated. In any case, no practitioner
of Dharma can dispense with making good karma which of course
involves kindness and compassion.
If making good karma, (puñña) or merit, counts as basic practice
what then would be the reﬁned? Many would think that the more subtle
types of practice would qualify, such as vipassanā or insight meditation
or, outside Theravāda, reﬁned samādhi experience in Ch’an/Zen, or
tantric methods mostly found in Tibetan Buddhist sects, or of course
Dzogchen. But then if these are designated as “reﬁned” practices, and
thought of in that light with respect to oneself, will it not sound like
conceit? Selﬂess practice would be best.
“In all directions ten” (dasa-disa) is often used in verse to mean everywhere, all round, in every direction (verse 725). In the same verse
there is “growing in faith and modesty”. Modesty (hiri) has been
commented on in the Notes following the Hiri Sutta (Snp 2.3). Upon
saddhā it needs only be said that the English translation of this as
“faith” is not very accurate. The English word is, after all, used in Christian contexts where one is expected to believe, in some cases without
question, whatever the church asserts to be true. But Buddhists call
such beliefs “views” which unqualiﬁed by any adjectives always means
“wrong views”—simple because they are not or cannot be questioned.
So saddha in Buddhist teachings means more like “conﬁdence” which
deepens with practice and is balanced by wisdom (pañña/prajña). Saddhā would be ill-translated by “belief ”.
In the line before this there is the word māmaka, literally “one who
make mine” but meaning “one who loves me” or is “devoted to me”. The
person with saddhā makes the Buddha his or her own and cannot be
shaken from his teaching.

3.12

Observation of Dualities
Dvayatānupassanā Sutta

Thus have I heard:
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī at the eastern
Monastery, the mansion of Migāra’s Mother. Now at that time the
Buddha was seating in the open, surrounded by the the Saṅgha of
bhikkhus. It was the uposatha day, the night of the ﬁfteenth day full
moon. Then the Buddha, having surveyed the Saṅgha of monks sitting
silently, addressed the bhikkhus:
“Bhikkhus, if they ask you, ‘What is the purpose of learning those
skilful principles that are noble, emancipating, leading to full enlightenment?’ You should say to them, ‘Only for the sake of knowing in
accordance with reality the duality of principles.’
“What duality should you speak of?
“‘This is suﬀering, this is the origin of suﬀering’, this is one observation. ‘This is the end of suﬀering, this is the practice leading to the
end of suﬀering’, this is a second observation. Rightly observing this
duality, a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and resolute may expect one of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very life, or is there is
anything left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Those who do not understand suﬀering,
Or suﬀering’s origination;
Or where all suﬀering
Ceases without remainder;
They do not know the path
Leading to the stilling of suﬀering.
They lack the release of the heart,
And the release by understanding;

₇₃₀

3.12 observation of dualities

227

They are incapable of making an end,
They go again to birth and old age.

₇₃₁

Those who do understand suﬀering,
And suﬀering’s origination;
And where all suﬀering
Ceases without remainder;
They know the path
Leading to the stilling of suﬀering.

₇₃₂

They possess the release of the heart,
And the release by understanding;
They are capable of making an end,
They do not go again to birth and old age.

₇₃₃

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘Whatever suﬀering arises, all is caused by attachments’, this is
one observation. ‘With the complete ending of all attachments there is
no arising of suﬀering’, this is a second observation. Rightly observing
this duality, a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and resolute may
expect one of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very life, or is there
is anything left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Suﬀerings come to be because of attachments
Of many kinds in this world.
Whoever, unknowing, makes attachments,
That dull person goes to suﬀering again and again.
Therefore, understanding,
One should not make attachments,
Observing how suﬀering comes to be.

₇₃₄

228

sutta nipāta

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘Whatever suﬀering arises, all is caused by ignorance’, this is one
observation. ‘With the complete ending of all ignorance there is no
arising of suﬀering’, this is a second observation. Rightly observing
this duality, a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and resolute may
expect one of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very life, or is there
is anything left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Those who transmigrate
Through birth and death, again and again;
In this form of existence or some other,
They go under the sway of ignorance alone.

₇₃₅

This ignorance really is the great deluder,
Because of which we have transmigrated for a long time,
Those beings who have arrived at understanding,
₇₃₆
Do not go to future lives.
“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘Whatever suﬀering arises, all is caused by kammic choices’, this
is one observation. ‘With the complete ending of all kammic choices
there is no arising of suﬀering’, this is a second observation. Rightly
observing this duality, a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and
resolute may expect one of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very
life, or is there is anything left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Whatever suﬀering arises in the world,
All is caused by kammic choices.

3.12 observation of dualities

229

With the cessation of such choices,
There is no arising of suﬀering.

₇₃₇

Knowing this danger,
That suﬀering is caused by kammic choices,
With the settling of all choices,
There is the stopping of perceptions;
Thus suﬀering comes to an end,
Knowing this as it is.

₇₃₈

Rightly seeing, the ones who know,
Rightly understanding, the clever ones,
Overcoming the fetters of Māra,
Do not go to future lives.

₇₃₉

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘Whatever suﬀering arises, all is caused by consciousness’, this
is one observation. ‘With the complete ending of all consciousness
there is no arising of suﬀering’, this is a second observation. Rightly
observing this duality, a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and
resolute may expect one of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very
life, or is there is anything left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Whatever suﬀering arises in the world,
All is caused by consciousness.
With the cessation of consciousness,
There is no arising of suﬀering.

₇₄₀

Knowing this danger,
That suﬀering is caused by consciousness,
With the stilling of consciousness,
One is wishless, quenched.

₇₄₁

230

sutta nipāta

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘Whatever suﬀering arises, all is caused by contact’, this is one observation. ‘With the complete ending of all contact there is no arising of
suﬀering’, this is a second observation. Rightly observing this duality,
a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and resolute may expect one
of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very life, or is there is anything
left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Struck by contacts,
They ﬂow down the stream of lives,
Practising the bad path,
They are far from the ending of fetters.

₇₄₂

But those who fully understand contact,
And with ﬁnal knowledge have stilled desire,
By comprehending contact,
They are wishless, quenched.

₇₄₃

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘Whatever suﬀering arises, all is caused by feeling’, this is one observation. ‘With the complete ending of all feeling there is no arising of
suﬀering’, this is a second observation. Rightly observing this duality,
a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and resolute may expect one
of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very life, or is there is anything
left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Whatever feelings there are,
Whether pleasant or painful,

3.12 observation of dualities

231

And even including neutral,
Internal and external;

₇₄₄

Knowing this as suﬀering,
Confusing, disintegrating;
Seeing feelings fall away with each touch,
One understands this matter.
With the ending of feelings,
One is wishless, quenched.

₇₄₅

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘Whatever suﬀering arises, all is caused by craving’, this is one
observation. ‘With the complete ending of all craving there is no arising of suﬀering’, this is a second observation. Rightly observing this
duality, a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and resolute may expect one of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very life, or is there is
anything left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Craving is a man’s partner,
In this long journey of transmigration;
In this form of existence or some other,
One does not escape transmigration.

₇₄₆

Knowing this danger,
That craving is caused by craving;
Free of craving, without grasping,
Mindful, a bhikkhu would go forth.

₇₄₇

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?

232

sutta nipāta

“‘Whatever suﬀering arises, all is caused by grasping’, this is one
observation. ‘With the complete ending of all grasping there is no
arising of suﬀering’, this is a second observation. Rightly observing
this duality, a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and resolute may
expect one of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very life, or is there
is anything left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Grasping is the cause of rebirth into a new life,
Living, one runs into suﬀering.
Those who are born must die,
This is the origin of suﬀering.

₇₄₈

Therefore, with the ending of grasping,
Rightly knowing, a clever one,
Directly knowing the ending of birth,
Does not go to future lives.

₇₄₉

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘Whatever suﬀering arises, all is caused by kammic activity’, this
is one observation. ‘With the complete ending of all kammic activity
there is no arising of suﬀering’, this is a second observation. Rightly
observing this duality, a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and
resolute may expect one of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very
life, or is there is anything left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Whatever suﬀering arises in the world,
All is caused by kammic activity.
With the cessation of kammic activities,
There is no arising of suﬀering.

₇₅₀

3.12 observation of dualities

233

Knowing this danger,
That suﬀering is caused by kammic activity,
Letting go of kammic activity,
One is freed from kammic activity.

₇₅₁

With craving for rebirth cut,
A bhikkhu has peace of mind;
Transmigrating through rebirths has ended,
They have no future lives.

₇₅₂

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘Whatever suﬀering arises, all is caused by intake’, this is one observation. ‘With the complete ending of all intake there is no arising of
suﬀering’, this is a second observation. Rightly observing this duality,
a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and resolute may expect one
of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very life, or is there is anything
left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Whatever suﬀering arises in the world,
All is caused by intake.
With the cessation of intakes,
There is no arising of suﬀering.

₇₅₃

Knowing this danger,
That suﬀering is caused by intake,
By fully understanding all intakes,
One is not dependent on any intake.

₇₅₄

Rightly knowing true health,
With the complete ending of corruptions,
Discerning, the practitioner stands ﬁrm in Dhamma,
₇₅₅
The knowing one cannot be classiﬁed.

234

sutta nipāta

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘Whatever suﬀering arises, all is caused by commotions’, this is
one observation. ‘With the complete ending of all intake there is no
arising of commotions’, this is a second observation. Rightly observing
this duality, a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and resolute may
expect one of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very life, or is there
is anything left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Whatever suﬀering arises in the world,
All is caused by commotions.
With the cessation of commotions,
There is no arising of suﬀering.

₇₅₆

Knowing this danger,
That suﬀering is caused by commotions,
Therefore one should relinquish commotions,
And uproot conditioned activities;
With no commotions, not grasping,
Mindful, a bhikkhu would go forth.

₇₅₇

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘The dependent are vulnerable’, this is one observation. ‘The independent are not vulnerable’, this is a second observation. Rightly
observing this duality, a monk who meditates diligent, ardent, and
resolute may expect one of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very
life, or is there is anything left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
One who is independent is not vulnerable,
But one who is dependent and grasping,

3.12 observation of dualities

235

In this form of existence or some other,
Does not escape transmigration.

₇₅₈

Knowing this danger,
That dependencies are the great fear,
Independent, not grasping,
Mindful, a bhikkhu would go forth.

₇₅₉

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘The non-physical realms are better than the physical realms’, this
is one observation. ‘Cessation is better than the non-physical realms’,
this is a second observation. Rightly observing this duality, a monk
who meditates diligent, ardent, and resolute may expect one of two
results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very life, or is there is anything left
over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
The beings in the physical realms,
And those committed to non-physical realms,
Not understanding cessation,
They go on to future rebirth.

₇₆₀

Those who understand the physical realms,
And are not committed to non-physical realms,
They are freed by cessation,
And leave death behind.

₇₆₁

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘That which is regarded as truth by this world together with its
gods, its Māras and its Brahmās, in this generation together with its
ascetics and priests, its princes and people, that the noble ones, having

236

sutta nipāta

clearly seen with correct wisdom in accordance with reality, understand to be false’, this is one observation. ‘That which is regarded as
false by this world together with its gods, its Māras and its Brahmās, in
this generation together with its ascetics and priests, its princes and
people, that the noble ones, having clearly seen with correct wisdom in
accordance with reality, understand to be true’, this is a second observation. Rightly observing this duality, a monk who meditates diligent,
ardent, and resolute may expect one of two results: ﬁnal knowledge in
this very life, or is there is anything left over, non-return.”
This is what the Buddha said. Having said this, the Teacher, the
Sublime One, said further:
Look at this world with its gods,
Enmeshed in the physical and the mental,
Thinking not-self is self,
It thinks, “This is truth”.

₇₆₂

Whatever they think it is,
It becomes something else;
That is false for them,
For transient things are delusory.

₇₆₃

But quenching is not delusory,
That the noble ones know to be true;
By comprehending the truths,
They are wishless, quenched.

₇₆₄

“If, bhikkhus, they ask you, ‘Might there be another way of rightly
observing duality?’ you should say, ‘There is’. And how is there?
“‘That which is regarded as pleasure by this world together with
its gods, its Māras and its Brahmās, in this generation together with
its ascetics and priests, its princes and people, that the noble ones,
having clearly seen with correct wisdom in accordance with reality,
understand to be suﬀering’, this is one observation. ‘That which is

3.12 observation of dualities

237

regarded as suﬀering by this world together with its gods, its Māras and
its Brahmās, in this generation together with its ascetics and priests,
its princes and people, that the noble ones, having clearly seen with
correct wisdom in accordance with reality, understand to be pleasure’,
this is a second observation. Rightly observing this duality, a monk
who meditates diligent, ardent, and resolute may expect one of two
results: ﬁnal knowledge in this very life, or is there is anything left
over, non-return.”
Sights, sounds, tastes, and smells,
Touches, mental phenomena, the lot;
Are wished for, desirable, pleasing,
As long as it is said: “They exist”.

₇₆₅

These are agreed by the world
With its gods to be pleasurable,
But when they cease,
That, they agree, is suﬀering.

₇₆₆

The uprooting of identity
Is seen by the noble ones as pleasurable;
But this contradicts
What the whole world sees.

₇₆₇

What others see as pleasure,
The noble ones see as suﬀering;
What others see as suﬀering,
The noble ones see as pleasure.

₇₆₈

See this principle, so hard to understand,
Which confuses the ignorant.
Shrouded in darkness,
Blind, they cannot see.

₇₆₉

238

sutta nipāta
The good can see as by a light
When the curtain is drawn back.
But beasts who are unskilled in Dhamma,
Do not understand, even when it is right there.

₇₇₀

Overcome by desire for new life,
Flowing down the stream of rebirth,
They are reborn in Māra’s realm:
This is not the Teaching of the Buddha.

₇₇₁

Who beside the noble ones
Is worthy of waking up to that state?
Fully understanding that state,
One is quenched, without corruptions.

₇₇₂

This is what the Buddha said. Pleased, the bhikkhus rejoiced in
the Buddha’s words. And while this explanation was being spoken
the minds of sixty bhikkhus were freed from the corruptions without
grasping.
(Snp 730–772)

chapter 4

The Chapter of Eights
4.1

Objects, Desires and Pleasures
Kāma Sutta
If one with a desiring mind
Succeeds in gaining sensual pleasure,
A mortal such is pleased in mind
With wishes all fulﬁlled.

₇₇₃

But if from this person passionate
all of these pleasures disappear,
then does this pleasure-addict feel,
as though by arrows pierced.

₇₇₄

The one who shuns these pleasures of sense,
like treading not on a serpent’s head,
such a one with mindfulness
this tangled world transcends.

₇₇₅

Obsessed with ﬁelds and property,
with money, estates and those employed,
with many pleasures, women and kin,
such a person greedily—

₇₇₆

240

sutta nipāta
Do weaknesses bring down indeed,
by dangers is that person crushed,
and then by dukkhas stuck against—
as water into broken boat.

₇₇₇

So let a mindful one avoid
at every turn these sense-desires,
with them abandoned, cross the ﬂood,
as boat is baled for the Further Shore.

₇₇₈
(Snp 773–778)

The famous word Kāma
First, we can consider its range of meaning, a range which no one word
in English can cover. As it is a very important word, used in so many
diﬀerent ways, there are only two choices to make in its translation.
We may choose not to translate it, letting the context of its use bring
out its sense, but this has the disadvantage that its meaning may not
be revealed in full. In this Sutta Nipāta translation I have not chosen
this alternative. The second of these is to use appropriate and diﬀerent
English words to render the various meanings of kāma. This also has a
disadvantage as the full range of this word is not apparent if one reads
only English. This note, then is to bring out these varied meanings of
kāma as well as drawing attention to compound words in Pāli of which
kāma is part.
Kāma meaning “desire”. This means “desire based on the senses”.
A sense-object is seen (heard, etc.), by way of the organ of the eye
or ear (no problem so far!), it registers in the mind and is identiﬁed
with a name (this is the operation of saññā which includes memory as
part of perception (still no trouble!). Then desire—kāma—may arise
wanting that which has been perceived. This is where we may have
diﬃculties—maybe we get what we want but still are not satisﬁed
(though all sense-objects are impermanent), or we don’t get it and so

4.1 objects, desires and pleasures

241

suﬀer in another way. Kāma as sense-desire is very much tied up with
my idea of my self, so even its fulﬁlment is a limitation. Desires of this
kind, as we learn from so many places in the Pāli Suttas, are compared
to a blazing ﬁre. Stoke up the ﬁres of desire and suﬀer even more!. Our
materialistic culture with its unending advertisements stokes these
ﬁres and in doing so feeds the ﬁres, so that no peace, satisfaction, or
true happiness can be had in the long run.
Of course, as with the English word “desire”—it may be used in
good beneﬁcial contexts—so the word kāma also stretches to cover
beneﬁcial matters. One may desire the Dharma and in Pāli one would
be spoken of as dhammakāmo. One may also desire the beneﬁt of others, even their Liberation—this desire also falls under the word kāma.
People sometimes ask, “But can I say that I desire Nirvāṇa?”. A reply
to this might be that at the beginning of Buddhist study and practice
one may desire to experience Nirvāṇa but as practice progresses the
desire for that fades away as the Path to it and Nirvāṇa meld together.
Sense-desires are very varied, some very reﬁned (as desire for
sublimely peaceful states of mind), and some much grosser (as with
eating delicious food, or of course for sex). In the latter contexts it is
appropriate to use the words “sensual” and “sensuality” as translations
of kāma, and when kāma is part of the compound kāmarāga, sex and
sexual are deﬁnitely indicated. Rāga by itself and combined with kāma
indicates “lust”.
Kāma as sense-objects, the world of kāma. So far kāma as a component of mind has been mentioned, but the word also stretches to
include the variegated nature of sense objects. In this translation of
Snp 50 in The Rhino’s Horn you will ﬁnd—
Sense-desires so varied, sweet,
in divers forms disturb the mind,
Seeing the bane of sense-desires,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.

242

sutta nipāta

This translation emphasizes sense-desires as an aspect of kāma.
But it can also be translated—
Things of sense so varied, sweet,
in divers forms disturb the mind,
When danger’s seen in things of sense,
fare singly as the rhino’s horn.
“Things of sense” (vatthukāma) emphasizes the array of objects
known by the way of eye, ear, nose, tongue and sense of touch. For a
person with no sense-restraint they disturb the mind. English has no
one word which will stretch over both the interior sense-desire and
the exterior sense-objects. There are many examples of translators
using the wrong meaning of the work kāma in their works.
Beyond desires and things of sense there is also kāma as enjoyment,
sense-pleasure, sensuality/sexuality. In general, Theravāda Buddhist
teachings counsel that one should restrain one’s senses and not indulge
in this aspect of kāma. However, the Suttas have been preserved by
bhikkhus and emphasize their attitude to sense-restraint. Lay people
in traditional Theravāda countries tend to disregard this and enjoy
life, unless there are secluding themselves for Dharma-practice as on
the Uposatha days (full moon or new moon) or on a longer meditation
retreat.
Turning away from kāma, as in a monastic life, is very diﬀerent
from its natural enjoyment. The ﬁrst is emphasized by the Pāli Kāma
Sutta, the second by the Hindu (Sanskrit) Kāma Sūtra. In this book and
other Hindu works on kāma, the meaning of this word is not conﬁned,
as some think, to sexual enjoyment. In fact they have treatises on civilized and reﬁned enjoyment of all the senses: music ﬁt for the time
of day and the persons present, gardens and ﬂower-arrangements,
food and diﬀerent sorts of incense, and so on. None of these things
from a Buddhist viewpoint are in any way wrong or evil—they are
just beautiful parts of this world—“things of sense so varied, sweet.”

4.1 objects, desires and pleasures

243

Whether they disturb the mind or not depends on how much Dharmapractice one has done. One who has gone far on the Path according to
Theravāda sources seems to be a person no longer interested in senseobjects, having few desires and little or no enjoyment in the diﬀerent
aspects of kāma. This suggests a rather dour character, serious and
unsmiling. But the monastic Teachers that I have me usually had an
excellent sense of humour, and some of them with their very earthy
stories, had their audience roaring with laughter.
A rather diﬀerent approach to kāma is found in some Tibetan Buddhist teachings such as Dzogchen. Here the array of sense-objects are
looked upon as the ornaments of the world we live in. These ornaments
are to be oﬀered (which implies we let go of them, thus not controlling
them but not renounceing them), along with everything else: form
(= body), sound, smell, taste, touch, the whole range of dharmas (=
mind). The ﬁve great nectars, blood, that which arises from the fusion of the last two, the Awakened Heart, the “wheel” of practice—all
oﬀered inﬁnitely. In this tradition, all aspects of kāma, within the mind
as desires outside in the world as sense-objects, and the enjoyments depending on them are to be integrated without the usual judgements—
of this is good or that is bad. This allows what is repressed in mind to
be liberated along with all the Qualities praised in the Dharma. Actions
which would bring about the suﬀering of others through this process
of integration are avoided by the samaya or relationship one has with
Teachers and fellow-practitioners.

4.2

The Eight on the Body as a Cave
Guhaṭṭhaka Sutta
The person who’s to their body-cave
Clouded by many moods, and in delusion sunk,
Hard it is for that one, far from detachment,
To abandon sensual pleasures in the world.

₇₇₉

Bound the worldly pleasures of the past,
And hard to liberate are they in future time,
From others they’re not free, not liberated—
They’re attached to past and the future too.

₇₈₀

Those who are niggardly, who hank after pleasures,
infatuated they are, all their things—losses all!
But subjected to pain they lament their losses—
For how can all this be taken away, they wail?

₇₈₁

Therefore should a person train,
Seeing the roughness of the world,
To take not to a wicked way,
For the wise say, life is short!

₇₈₂

I see here trembling, fearful in the world,
These people gone under the sway of craving for births¹—
Base people ﬂoundering in the jaws of death,
₇₈₃
Not free from craving for repeated birth.
Look at them trembling with their egotistic selﬁshness,
Like ﬁsh in a stream fast drying-up,
Seeing it so, fare unselﬁsh in this life,
₇₈₄
And cease worrying on diﬀerent states of being.
¹ Sujato: lkm had “That these people variously desiring diﬀerent being”, which is
barely intelligible.

4.2 the body as a cave

245

No longer longing towards either extreme
Having understood touch, together with letting go,
One should do what others will praise and not blame,
A wise one is not stained by what is seen and heard. ₇₈₅
The sage has known perception and crossed the ﬂood,
So with nothing tainted, nothing wrapped around,
They fare on in diligence with the arrow drawn,
₇₈₆
Neither longing for this world nor for another.
(Snp 779–786)

4.3

The Eight on the Corruptions of the Mind
Duṭṭhaṭṭhaka Sutta
Some speak with wicked intent,
while others are convinced their words are due,
but whatever talk there is the sage enters no debate,
therefore nowhere barren is the silent sage.²

₇₈₇

But a person led by his own desires,
and then continuing accordingly ﬁnds it hard,
to let them go, accepting his own thoughts as true,
becomes one who speaks as a believer.

₇₈₈

So if a person without being asked,
having practiced and praised virtues,
even those of himself, invented by himself,
the good say this is an ignoble act indeed.

₇₈₉

But that bhikkhu who’s serene at heart
and praises neither his own practices or virtue,
not labelling himself “I” in “this”, the good praise him:
₇₉₀
“No arrogance has he for anything in the world”.
Who’s thoughts, imagined and put together, then prefer
even though their source is not puriﬁed,
seeing advantage for himself, he relies upon this,
depending on what is imagined,
₇₉₁
constructed and conventional.
When one has grasped
from among many Dharma-doctrines,
after due considerations one clings to a View,
² Sujato: lkm’s rendering of the last line, “And yet…”, is misleading. The Pali does
not express disjunction but consequence, tasmā = therefore.

4.3 corruptions

247

or condemns those of others,
hence it’s not easy to transcend those Dharmas.

₇₉₂

There is not in the world such a puriﬁed person
who continues in these views about existential states,
for this person of purity, let go of illusion and conceit,
₇₉₃
how can he be in any way reckoned?
Who is not attached still enters into doctrinal debates,
but one unattached, how could he take sides?
For him nothing is taken up or put down,³
₇₉₄
With all views shaken oﬀ, relying on none.
(Snp 787–794)

³ Sujato: Here the Pali word atta means “taken up”, and is not the well-known atta
meaning “self ”. See Norman’s note on this verse. I have corrected the translation
accordingly

4.4

The Eight on Purity
Suddhaṭṭhaka Sutta
“A pure one I see”, free completely from disease,
so by “seeing” such (it is said) one attains to purity.
Convinced about this and holding it highest
that one relies on this knowledge
while contemplating purity.

₇₉₅

But if a person by seeings’ puriﬁed
or if through such knowledge could leave dukkha aside
then one with assets still by another could be puriﬁed:
₇₉₆
this view betrays one who speaks in this way.
The Brahmin says not that “by another, one is puriﬁed”—
not by sights or by sounds, rites and vows and what’s sensed.
Such person’s not stuck upon merit or evil,
with selﬁshness renounced, constructing nothing here. ₇₉₇
Former (things⁴) let go, then to other (things) attached,
following craving, their bondage, they do not overcross,
so they (continue) with grasping and discarding,
as monkey letting go a branch to seize upon another. ₇₉₈
A person undertaking (holy) vows goes high and low—
they waver, fettered by conditional perceptions.
But one who has learnt well and the Dharma penetrated
goes not up and down—
₇₉₉
that one of wisdom profound.
Within all the dharmas whether seen or they’re heard,
or otherwise sensed, this one ﬁghts not at all,
that one who sees them nakedly while faring to the end,
₈₀₀
by whom in the world could he be described?
⁴ “Things”: teacher, lover, view, objects etc.

4.4 purity

249

They neither form views, show nothing’s preferred,
nor do they claim a purity supreme,
having loosened craving’s knot with which they were bound,
no longer they have longing for what’s in the world. ₈₀₁
Having Known, having Seen, there’s nothing to be grasped
by a Brahmin gone beyond all limitations,
neither lustful with lusts nor to lustlessness attached—
in this there is nothing that’s grasped as the highest. ₈₀₂
(Snp 795–802)

4.5

The Eight on the Ultimate
Paramaṭṭhaka Sutta
Whoever should take to himself certain views,
thinking them best, supreme in the world,
and hence he proclaims all others as low—
by this he does not become free from disputes.

₈₀₃

In whatever is seen by him, heard, and cognized,
vows and rites done—he sees proﬁt in these;
and so from his grasping at that very view
all others he sees as worthless, as low.

₈₀₄

Intelligent people declare it a bond,
if relying on one he sees others as low;
therefore should a bhikkhu rely not on rites,
on vows, on the seen, the heard, and cognized.

₈₀₅

And so in this world let him fashion no views
relying on knowledge⁵, rites and vows done,
nor let him conceive that he’s on a par,
nor think himself low, nor higher than them.

₈₀₆

Abandoning own views, not grasping (at more)
and even in knowledge not seeking support,
’mong those who dispute he never takes sides,
to the various views he does not recourse.

₈₀₇

Having no bias for either extreme—
for being, or not, here, the next world,
for a bhikkhu like this there’s no settling down,
’mong dharmas seized and decided (by them).

₈₀₈

⁵ Traditional knowledge.

4.5 the ultimate

251

Concerning the seen, the heard and cognized,
not the least notion is fashioned by him,
that one who’s perfected grasps at no view,
by whom in the world could he be described?

₈₀₉

Neither they’re fashioned nor honoured at all—
those doctrines, they’re never accepted by him:
Perfected, not guided by rites or by vows,
One Thus, not returning, beyond has he gone.

₈₁₀

(Snp 803–810)

4.6

Ageing and Decay
Jarā Sutta
Short indeed is this life—
within a hundred years one dies,
and, if any live longer
then they die of decay.

₈₁₁

People grieve for what is “mine”:
though possessions are not permanent
and subject to destruction—
see this and homeless dwell.

₈₁₂

In death it’s all abandoned,
yet still some think “it’s mine”;
knowing this, the wise to me devoted
should stoop not making it “owned”.

₈₁₃

As one who’s waking then sees not
the things that happened in sleep;
so the beloved are not seen—
departed and done their time.

₈₁₄

People now are seen and heard
and this are called by name,
but alone will the name remain
in speaking of those gone.

₈₁₅

In “mine-making” greedy, they do not let go
of sorrow, lamenting and avarice,
therefore sages leaving possessions
freely wander, seers of security.

₈₁₆

For a bhikkhu practicing in solitude,
keeping company with secluded mind,

4.6 ageing and decay

253

of such a one are all agreed:
“In being he’ll not be seen again”.

₈₁₇

In all matters the sage is unsupported,
nothing that makes dear, nor undear,
sorrow and avarice do not stain that one,
As water does not stay upon a leaf.

₈₁₈

As a water-drop on lotus plant,
as water does not stain a lotus ﬂower,
even so the sage is never stained
by seen, heard, or whatever’s cognized.

₈₁₉

Certainly the wise do not conceive
upon the seen, the heard, and cognized,
nor wish for purity through another,
for they are not attached nor yet displeased.

₈₂₀

(Snp 811–820)

Reﬂections on the Jarā Sutta
811: “Short indeed is this life.” When young the days are long and
life has inﬁnite possibilities, we think. Death then is something
that happens to others, not to us. As we grow older, life passes
by more rapidly, ﬁlled with many pleasures, pains and responsibilities. But when really old we remark that “I don’t know where
that week (or month or year) has gone”. So even with modern
medical facilities “within a hundred years one dies”. Some do
live longer but the Buddhist emphasis, contrary to the medical
view which supports only that the body should be kept alive as
long as possible, is that āyu (long-life) should be accompanied
and guided by ñāṇa (clarity of mind or wisdom).

254

sutta nipāta

812: “Seeing” impermanence is very important, not just occasionally
through the loss of dear people or possessions but deeply and
thoroughly in one’s heart through the arising and passing of
thoughts whether they are holy ones or those based on greed, hatred and delusion—all should be known as impermanent. Whether
this experience results in dwelling homeless or not depends
upon one’s circumstances. And the homelessness of the bhikkhu
or bhikkhunī will not suit everybody. A kind of homelessness
may be lived in a household life when there is little or no “minemaking” (mamaṁkāra). This however presupposes that there is
no longer the tendency to “I-making” (ahaṁkāra).
813: People often think that their possessions, in which they may
include their bodies and some aspects of their minds which they
are glad to own, are really theirs in spite of the message of the
death of uncountable trillions of human beings in the distant and
recent past. “You can’t take it with you when you go” is a piece
of valuable folk-wisdom, though many try to exercise control
of their wealth from beyond the grave. Buddhist tradition is to
give away wealth and possessions before one dies. At least one
makes some good karma by such generosity, while “western”
traditions generally emphasize making a will, which leaves to
executors the task of allotting bequests to friends and relatives
of the deceased. This is not the best way of disposing of so called
“possessions”.
814: Seeing life as a dream, not as real and substantial, is a very helpful practice. Even when it is regarded as real, solid and so on
grasping is possible even through one is grasping at more illusions, as is said in the Diamond-cutter Vajracchedika Sutra:
As stars, a fault of vision, as a lamp,
A magic show, as rain-cloud, as a bubble,
as dream, a lightning-strike, as drops of dew,
like this should be viewed all that is conditioned.

4.6 ageing and decay

255

The illusive is less easily grasped and letting-go becomes easier. “Departed and done their time”: those departed (peta) have
literally “done their time” (kālakataṁ), so it is not only those in
gaol, but all of us captured by the desires and pleases of saṁsāra
—we are still doing our time.
815: This well-known verse used in obituaries and the like in Buddhist
countries underlines how frail our self-importance is. As we live
now we have so many connections with others, and perhaps our
names are well-known, even famous. After death our fame fades
away and as generation succeeds generation others’ knowledge
of us grows less and less, till even mighty rulers are little more
than half-forgotten names. Who now knows what sort of person
King Asoka was and how he conducted his court and treated his
wives? We know him mostly from his famous Edicts carved upon
rocks, while even Buddhist legends about him are less reliable
and open to question in many ways. If such a mighty ruler’s fame
will fade in only two thousand years or so, what remembrance
will there be of our own small doings in a tenth of that time?
816: No one is truly secure because of many and expensive possessions. Security comes from letting-go, both of persons and possessions “out there”, and to grasping “one’s own” body and mind.
817: “In being he’ll not be seen again” means that as a bhikkhu practicing Dharma in solitude with a non-roaming mind, one which is
secluded from distractions, he (but this applies equally to female
practitioners) will not reappear in birth and death free from the
Wheel of being or becoming.
818: “The sage is unsupported”—he or she has no need of supports,
no need to lean on anything, not even persons, on institutions,
upon dogmas or sectarian commentaries, not even upon the wise
and Enlightened. And why? No props are necessary for those
who have reached the Further Shore and no raft either. Such
unstained sages are compared to the leaves of tropical plants

256

sutta nipāta

which shed the rain falling on them immediately and so are not
ravelled in sorrow and avarice.
818: Lotus plants, both leaves and ﬂowers, have a soapy covering so
water does not lay upon them at all. This is the basis for many
references in the Buddha’s teachings to lotuses and their purity.
Hence they are never stained, not by the mud in which they grow
nor by any pollution in the rain or atmosphere. All that rolls oﬀ
and does not adhere to the surface. Sages are like that.
820: “Not conceiving upon the seen, heard and sensed”; since this is
a common human activity, relying on no senses at all must seem
strange. Even stranger is the fact that they do not “conceive”,
meaning that they have no conceit. (This play upon related words
occurs also in Pāli with the verb maññati and the noun māna).
So in the sage there is no measuring of him or herself against
either people—there is no “I am superior”, “I am equal” or “I am
inferior” for this is what conceit means in the Buddhadharma.
The sage knows that purity comes from the heart and so could be
neither attached, on the side of greed, nor displeased, on hatred’s
side.

4.7

To Tissametteyya on the Disadvantages of Sex
Tissametteyya Sutta

tissa

buddha

Attached to sexual intercourse:
Sir, tell its disadvantages,
having heard your Teaching then,
secluded we will train ourselves.

₈₂₁

Attached to sexual intercourse,
forgetful of the Teaching then,
wrong things that person practices,
and does what is not Noble.

₈₂₂

Who formerly fared on alone
but now in sex indulges,
“Low” they say’s that common worldly one,
like vehicle swerving oﬀ the track.

₈₂₃

That one who had renown and fame—
that, for sure, diminishes,
having seen this, train yourself,
renouncing sexual intercourse.

₈₂₄

Overcome by (lustful) thoughts,
that one broods as a beggar does,
and hearing reproach of others, then
such a person is depressed.

₈₂₅

For yourself creating “arms”
of others reprimanding words,
so with great entanglement
sinks down into untruthfulness.

₈₂₆

Well-known as “one who’s wise”
when vowing to the single life,

258

sutta nipāta
but later then engaged in sex
will be “a fool deﬁled”.

₈₂₇

The disadvantage having known,
the sage, at start and afterwards,
should stablish fast the single life,
having no recourse to sex.

₈₂₈

So train yourself in solitude,
for that’s the life of Noble Ones,
but not conceive oneself as “best”—
them near indeed to Nirvāṇa.

₈₂₉

The sage who’s rid of sense-desires,
who to them’s indiﬀerent,
who’s crossed the ﬂood, is envied then,
by those enmeshed with pleasures of sense.

₈₃₀

(Snp 821–830)

Verse by verse commentary on this Sutta.
821: This Sutta’s “disadvantages” of sex for a Dharma-practitioner
makes a rather strange list:
• one becomes forgetful of the teachings;
• others blame a celibate who later turns or returns to sex;
• less of fame and reputations due to the last;
• fantasies and brooding increase (= more moha-delusion).
These are dealt with below. My list of disadvantages is rather
more practical:
• possible entanglements which are diﬃcult to get out of;
• less opportunity for (meditation) practice in a relationship;
• exhaustion from work and family.

4.7 to tissametteyya

259

It is much better to emphasize the advantages of the Good Life
as a celibate rather than listing supposed or real disadvantages:
• time and place available for practice if a monk/nun;
• livelihood comparatively easy;
• celibate practitioners are honoured and supported;
• mind may be unburdened from many worldly problems.
The Pāli word used in this verse, methuna, means both sexual
intercourse and sexuality generally.
822: Why would a person in a relationship necessarily be “forgetful of the Sāsana” (teaching)? This is a bit similar to present
day Thai ideas of a bhikkhu who is believed to have lost or cast
aside his Dharma knowledge at the time of his disrobing, a sort
of “lose robes, lose Dharma”. Such a person is said to practice
wrongly and does what is not Ariyan. This word presumably
means “what is not of the Noble Ones”, and is not a racial reference. Still, these Noble Ones include all who have true insight
into the Dharma from Stream-winners to Arahats. In the later
list of the ten fetters (saṁyojana) the ﬁrst two of these, stream
winner and once-returner, still have lust and so can have sex,
while the Non-returner cannot due to lack of sexual desire, while
Arahats are well beyond such worldly matters. This scheme of
listing which fetters disappear with each attainment seems very
artiﬁcial and inadequate. Now in the present verse since sex is
labelled as ignoble and no reference made to the (later?) four
stages of Noble insight, it seems that any sexual relationship
must, by anyone, be looked down upon.
823: That Dharma cannot include the love of a partner is emphasized
in this verse. “Fared on (the verb carati—see introductory section) alone” means the celibate life either as a lay person, or as a
monk/nun. Judgement by others that one is now “low” having
given this up, is still very much alive in Sri Lanka. “Swerving oﬀ

260

sutta nipāta

the track” might be true for some: a young American bhikkhu
who disrobed after some years as a forest monk comes to mind.
He plunged into the varied ﬂeshpots of Bangkok. But this would
not be the pattern for most people whose progress in the Dharma
may need a partner. Rather than denigrating sex, as this Sutta
tries to do, it would be an improvement to admit that the path of
many great and noble people in this world has been made possible through the support that they receive from their partners.
After all, love must be an ingredient, a very important one, upon
every spiritual path. Certainly there can be love without sex,
but the combination of the two is even more powerful. Not all
Buddhist traditions involve celibacy, notably of course tantric
varieties of the Dharma. Their approach is conceivably saner
and lacks the rather shrill tone of this Sutta’s denial of sexuality.
This verse is an appeal based on love of status: having reached
“renown and fame” as a celibate practitioners, perhaps as a Chao
Khun (Thailand), Sayadaw (Bunna), Mahathera Sri Lanka), suddenly by disrobing one becomes ordinary. The argument seems
to be: remain celibate, have no sex, so that “renown and fame”
are preserved. What kind of argument is this!
825: This is a verse of warning: think lustful thoughts and as a result
brood upon the conﬂict of having these within a life of celibacy,
leading to guilt and depression. But this practitioner seems not
to know much Dharma. There are all the contemplations of the
impermanence of the body and its inevitable decay, eventually
becoming a fearsome sight with an indescribable stench (see
Snp 1.11, the Vijaya Sutta), as well as reﬂections on non-self and
emptiness. All thoughts whether wholesome or unwholesome
are empty of any essence, they have no owner, so who is getting
depressed or feeling guilty? They arise and pass away due to
conditioning and there is no one who can force them to disappear.
Obsession with thoughts of sex and guilt for thinking them are

4.7 to tissametteyya

261

signs that one needs to practise more the methods mentioned
above. As for others’ reproach, well, some even people always
criticize the most virtuous, an even slander them. Remember!
The Buddha said that there is no one who cannot be blamed
for even he himself was an object of blame (See Dhp 227). If
one listened to every slur and took it to heart, one would never
practice Dharma.
826: Creating “arms” or weapons for punishing oneself on the basis
of others’ reprimands continues the topic of the last verse. These
reprimanding words uttered by other people, instead of letting
them go, are used by self-hatred as “weapons” to beat oneself up,
to lower one’s self-esteem. In this case, one’s conceit of oneself,
the way one conceives of oneself, is “I am inferior” and my inferiority compared with others is increasing. Others are viewed as
“superior to myself ” or perhaps as “equal to myself ”. Having low
self esteem makes it easier to do things which as they multiply
drag my self-conceit even lower. “Sinking down into untruthfulness” means that one’s actions (karmas) of mind, speech and
body depart increasingly from the truth of the Dharma. Cure:
an eﬀort to make all sorts of good karma beginning with simple
things: oﬀerings of food to teachers and to the poor, speaking
kind words to those who suﬀer, being helpful to those who need
it, etc. Then pages of chanting Dharma every day, and eventually begin to practice meditation. Do not try to do the diﬃcult
meditation practices ﬁrst.
827: Another warning verse about losing reputation. Same person,
with robes or other marks of celibacy and one is praised as wise,
without them and sexually active and one’s a fool. Like the last
verse this one is concerned with the Eight Worldly Dharmas,
principally the dark sides of the pairs: loss, disrepute, blame and
suﬀering (dukkha). For these see, the Maṅgala Sutta (Snp 2.4)
Commentary. The author of this verse assuming that it is not the

262

sutta nipāta

Buddha, has not considered that the subject here is “well-known
as wise” so he or she will not be at all upset by others derision.
A truly wise person has equanimity (upekkhā) so that his or her
mind could not be shaken.
828: This verse continues from the last and is another appeal to selfpride and cherishing one’s image—not the most Buddhist attitude surely!
829: The training of oneself in solitude is good for some people at some
times. In Buddhist traditions it has never been compulsory and it
is nonsense to assert, as this verse does, that the Noble Ones’ life
is solitary or always spent in the woods. Some who are ennobled
by the Dharma may chose to spend their lives in the forest, but
others may dwell in cities to help those who have diﬃculties
there. The second two lines of the verse are very true indeed: the
Noble Ones have no conceit of themselves as the “best”, but then
they have no conceit at all, hence the mention of Nirvāṇa.
830: The last verse is another appeal for celibacy: that one will be
envied “by those enmeshed with pleasures of sense”. That a practitioner should stand ﬁrm in celibacy for this reasons strikes on
as very peculiar.
This odd Sutta could only have originated from the Buddha if one
allows that he could have “oﬀ ” days. But this would mean that he was
only Buddha sometimes, while at others he would have been unenlightened! Not a Buddhist consideration! It is better to regard this Sutta as
the work of some rather unenlightened monks, defending their own
status but despising those Dharma-followers who led a household life.
How it got included in the Sutta Nipāta is a problem now insoluble.
We are told by the Pāli Commentary that this Tissa Metteyya and
the young Brahmin of the same name who appears at Snp 5.3 are not the
same person. The Commentary does relate a story as the background
for this Sutta, though its details do not sound very convincing.

4.8

Being Overbold, the Disadvantages of Debate
Pasura Sutta
They say: “In our Dharma purity’s found”
but deny that it is found in the Dharma of others.
On what they depend they say “it’s the best”,
and so settle down in their individual truths.

₈₃₁

Those disputants into the assembly rush,
and perceive opposedly “the other” as a fool.
But in disputes, on others they rely—
these so-called experts ever-loving praise.

₈₃₂

Engrossed in conﬂict midst the assembly,
fearing defeat, they wish only for praise,
having been refuted, that one’s truly confused,
angry at blame seeks weakness in the other.

₈₃₃

“Through investigation is your argument
refuted and destroyed”—so they say.
That one grieves and laments—that mere arguer,
“Oh! I am overcome” that person wails.

₈₃₄

Arisen among monks—those controversies
among them cause both elation and depression.
Refrain therefore, from disputation!
No meaning’s in it save the prize of praise.

₈₃₅

Praised in the midst of the assembly
for the presentation of arguments,
then that one laughs, or else is haughty.
So they say, “Conceited by winning debate”.

₈₃₆

Though haughtiness will be ground for a downfall,
still proudly that one speaks, and with arrogance:

264

sutta nipāta
this having seen, refrain from disputations—
not by that is there purity, so the skilled say.

₈₃₇

Just as a strong man, fed
upon royal food, might roar forth,
wishing for a champion rival,
but ﬁnds from the ﬁrst there’s nought to ﬁght.

₈₃₈

Those holding a view and disputing, say thus:
“This alone is the truth”, so they aver;
then reply to them: “But no one’s here
to retaliate through disputation”.

₈₃₉

They continue with their practice, oﬀering no opposition
against others, oﬀering no view opposed to view.
But then, Pasūra, what would you obtain?
For them there is nothing to be grasped as the highest. ₈₄₀
As you’ve come here, in your mind
thinking and speculating on various views,
you have met with a Washed One
But will not be able to make progress with him.

₈₄₁

(Snp 831–841)

4.9

Māgandiya Learns the Muni’s Life.
Māgandiya Sutta

buddha

māgand.

As Craving with Longing and Lust had been Seen
no spark of desire existed for sex,
What then about this ﬁlled with piss and with shit—
That even with foot I’d not wish to touch!

₈₄₂

If you don’t wish for a jewel such as this,
a woman desired by many lords of men,
what view do you hold, living by what rite,
by what vows to arise in what kind of life?

₈₄₃

buddha

As nothing is grasped among various Dharmas,
so for me there is not any “This I proclaim”,
having seen but not grasped among many views,
through discernment among them I saw inner peace. ₈₄₄

māgand.

Among what’s constructed thoroughly knowing,
Ungrasping, O Sage, do you speak upon these,
“inward peacefulness”—what meaning has that,
how will the wise declare it to be?

₈₄₅

buddha

Neither from views, not from learning or knowledge,
not from rites, or from vows, does purity come I say;
nor from no views, no learning, no knowledge acquired,
no rites and no vows—none of them at all,
Neither by grasping nor giving them up
₈₄₆
is their peace unsupported, and no hunger “to be”.

māgand.

If you speak then not of purity by views,
not by learning, not by knowledge, not rites and not vows;
nor from no views, no learning, no knowledge acquired,
by no rites and no vows—none of them at all,

266

sutta nipāta
then I think that this is very deluded Dharma,
for some depend on views as the source of purity.

buddha

₈₄₇

Questioning repeatedly dependent on views,
grasped at again, you’ve arrived at delusion,
not having experienced even a tiny perception of peace,
₈₄₈
so therefore you see this as very deluded.
Who as “equal” considers, “greater” or “less”,
conceiving others thus would dispute because of this;
but who by these three never is swayed,
₈₄₉
“equal”, “superior” does not exist.
Why would this Brahmin declare “this is the true”,
with whom would he argue that “this is false”,
in whom there is not “equal”, “unequal”,
with whom would he join another in dispute?

₈₅₀

With home let go, faring on in homelessness,
in villages the Sage having no intimates,
rid of sensual desires, having no preference,
would not with any arguments people engage.

₈₅₁

Unattached, one wanders forth in the world,
a Nāga, ungrasping, would not dispute those,
just as the water lily, thorny-stemmed species,
sullied is not by water or mud,
even so is the ungreedy Sage proclaiming Peace,
unsullied by desires and pleasures in the world.

₈₅₂

The Wise One’s not conceited by view or by intelligence,
for that one there is no “making-it-mine”;
and cannot be led by good works or by learning,
₈₅₃
cannot be led away by mind-shelters of view.

4.9 with māgandiya

267

For one detached from perception, there exist no ties,
for one by wisdom freed, no delusions are there,
but those who have grasped perceptions and views,
₈₅₄
they wander the world stirring up strife.
(Snp 842–854)

Notes on the Māgandiya Sutta
The two opening verses
In the ﬁrst line of the ﬁrst verse we are presented with a statement that
sex and lust with longing had been seen—but by who? And in what
way had they been seen? This Sutta does not identify who has spoken
these words. The verse continues with some very scornful words about
someone’s body though we are not told whose.
The second verse is obviously spoken by another person who concludes with an interesting question, or rather, a series of them. The Pāli
still fails to identify either of these persons. Only in the third verse do
we discover that the ﬁrst verse is supposed to be spoken by the Buddha
and the second by his supposed questioner, Māgandiya.
These two verses are worthy of closer examination as they present
a number of puzzling questions. The ﬁrst of these concerns the three
nouns: craving, longing, and lust which as aspects of mind must always concern those living a celibate life. So are they just that—three
troublesome mind-states? The answer to this is that in a few Suttas and
Pāli Commentaries these three have become a potent aspect of Māra’s
assault upon the potential Buddha while he was seated under the Bodhi
tree just before his Awakening. This assault is mentioned in Snp 3.2
where such mind-aspects and sense-desires, fear and hard heartedness are personalized into soldiers in Māra’s army. In the same way,
craving, longing and lust are transformed into the famous Daughters
of Māra. “Famous” because generations of Buddhist artists have delighted in portraying their seductive forms and alluring gestures upon

268

sutta nipāta

walls and in manuscripts, while monks have also enjoyed elaborating
upon this story. Of course, in the various accounts of this incident in
both Pāli and Sanskrit, the Daughters of Māra are defeated because the
Buddha cannot be seduced by them. If we understand this line to refer
to the three gorgeous girls, we must capitalize their names, but not do
the same for the verb “seen”, which would mean that the Buddha had
only seen them—been aware of them as sight-objects—but taken no
interest. On the other hand if they are personalized mind-states then
they do not merit capitalized names but the verb “Seen” should have a
capital letter to indicate that insight or vipassanā regarding lust and so
on. It is worth noting that though the Daughters of Māra legend occurs
in the classic Pāli Commentaries, it is rarely found in the Suttas. So
much for the ﬁrst line!
According to the Suttas, supported by the Commentaries, sexual
desire is eliminated with the attainment of reﬁned aspects of the paths
and fruits. The Buddha and his Arahat disciples are depicted in the
Vinaya and Sutta as having gone beyond sex and so having no longer to
struggle to maintain celibacy, having in fact none of the problems that
most people have with sexuality. This systematized view, slowly becoming known as “Theravāda”, promoted the growth of celibate Saṅghas of
monks and nuns, some of whom emphasized that only those in robes
could reach the more reﬁned stages of liberation. Ordinary practitioners could not become Arahats; and if by some strange collection of
causes they did, either they would have to be ordained on that very day,
or they would die! Though this seems most unlikely, it is opposed by the
presence at AN 6.119–139 of a list of lay practitioners “who have Gone
to the End, Seen the Deathless”. Some of them are familiar and others
more obscure but in any case these present-day Buddhists who are not
ordained should take heart and remember these heroes from so long
ago. Their names “Tapussa, Bhallika, Sudatta Anāthapiṇḍika, Citta
Macchikāsaṇḍika, Hatthaka Āḷavaka, Mahānāma Sakka, Ugga Vesālika, Sūrambaṭṭha, Jīvaka Komārabhacca, Nakulapitā, Tavakaṇṇika,

4.9 with māgandiya

269

Pūraṇa, Isidatta, Sandhāna, Vijaya, Vijayamāhika, Meṇḍaka, Vāseṭṭha,
Ariṭṭha, Sāragga”. There are no women in this list. The survival of these
men’s names among Pāli Suttas very full of teachings to and about the
monastic Saṅghas with Liberation limited to only ordained people, is
a small indication that in the Buddha’s days liberation was available to
all.⁶
The last two lines of this verse contain words of scorn said to be
uttered by the Buddha upon being presented with the beautiful Māgandiyā, daughter of the brahmin Māgandiya. The Dhammapada Commentary provides details of this story which does not appear in any
Sutta. The essence of this is as follows: Māgandiyā rejected many oﬀers
of marriage for his daughter made by wealthy and powerful princes.
However, upon seeing the footprints of the Buddha (note the connection with the Signs of the Superman—DN 30 and the remarks following
Snp 1038), was sure that he would be a suitable husband. After meeting
the Buddha and oﬀering him his daughter well-adorned the story continues with the popular account of the Buddha’s Awakening in which
Māra and his three daughters, Taṇhā (craving), Aratī (longing) and
Rāgā (lust)—whose bodies are rumoured to surpass all human beauty
try to upset the Bodhisattva’s intention. This encounter is made the
excuse for the future Buddha to scorn a mere human girl—Māgandiyā,
with these words—
“what then about this ﬁlled with piss and shit,
that even with food I’d not wish to touch!”
Now, all Buddhists hold that their Teacher was remarkable for his
Great Compassion (mahākaruṇā) towards every human being, and the
accounts of this life conﬁrm this. The scornful words quoted above are
said to have been spoken in the presence of Māgandiyā herself and
⁶ Sujato: This list is of lay ariyans, mostly stream-winners, not arahants as suggested
by lkm. See Bhikkhu Bodhi’s note to AN 6.119 in the Numerical Discourses of the
Buddha.

270

sutta nipāta

hardly sound like compassionate talk! As it turned out in the Dhammapada Commentary story these insulting words caused Māgandiyā—
not surprisingly—to hate the Buddha and to seek her revenge on him
by burning alive many of the ladies of the local king who were his
disciples. So Māgandiyā showed herself as a very nasty piece of work
who came to a grisly end. But could a Buddha act in such a way as to
bring this about?
As there are a number of Māgandiyās in the Suttas and Commentaries it may be that these have been confused so that fragments of
their legends have been patched together by a misogynist monk who
has put the above words in the Buddha’s mouth. After this tangle, Māgandiya the Brahmin addresses to the Buddha a number of questions
quite unrelated to what has gone before.
Miscellaneous notes
842: The ﬁrst verse of this Sutta is also found in the story-cycle of
King Udena in Dhammapada Commentary vol. 1, p.199ﬀ. of the
English translation, Buddhist Legends.
843: “in what kind of life”. “Life” translates bhava, literally “being”,
“existence”.
852: “Nāga”, literally a serpent or serpent-spirit connected with water.
Worshipped to bring rain. Also an elephant, but here means a
mighty Teacher.

4.10

“Before Breaking-up”: a Muni’s Qualities
Purābheda Sutta

question

buddha

Please Gotama, do you speak to me
upon the person perfected:
how’s their insight and their conduct
so that they can be called “Peaceful One”?

₈₅₅

One who is craving-free
before the body’s breaking-up,
not dependent on the past
in the present is prepared,
(and in future) has nought preferred,

₈₅₆

gone anger and gone fear as well,
gone boasting, gone remorse,
wise-speaker with no arrogance,
a Sage restrained in speech,

₈₅₇

no hopes for what’s to come,
no mourning for the past,
not led astray by views,
the singled seer “mid senses” touch

₈₅₈

one not concealing, not deceitful,
not hankering and neither mean,
not stuck-up, nor contemptuous,⁷
and not to slander given,

₈₅₉

to pleasures not addicted
and not to pride inclined,
⁷ Sujato: This line had an unintelligible note, and was translated by lkm as “not
rough with others, not causing disgust”, but I am pretty sure the actual meaning is
as I’ve given here. Since the note indicated uncertainty in how the line should be
translated, I think the change is justiﬁed.

272

sutta nipāta
gentle, ready witted, not
credulous and not attached,

₈₆₀

training not in hope of gain,
nor disturbed by getting none,
by cravings unobstructed,
hankering not for tastes,

₈₆₁

ever mindful and equanimous,
so, who as “equal” thinks not of themselves,
nor as better nor as worse,
has no of inﬂation any sense.

₈₆₂

And for whom there’s no “dependence”,⁸
not dependent, Dharma having known,
for such exists no craving for
existence, non-existence.⁹

₈₆₃

That one I call the Peaceful,
who no sensual pleasures seeks;
who therefore has no ties,
crossed entanglement.

₈₆₄

He does not bring up any sons,
and has no ﬁelds or lands;
for him there is nothing at all
that is taken up or put down

₈₆₅

on account of which, the people
with monks and Brahmins might accuse.
That one is undisturbed,
and by such words unmoved,

₈₆₆

⁸ Attachment to view.
⁹ Being and non-being, the two extreme views.

4.10 before breaking-up

273

gone greediness and never mean,
not speaking of themselves as “high”
not “equal”, nor “inferior”
so the unﬁttable does not ﬁt,

₈₆₇

for whom is nothing owned in the world
and having nothing does not grieve,
who ’mong Dharmas ventures not
is truly called a Peaceful One!

₈₆₈
(Snp 855–868)

4.11

Arguments and Disputes
Kalahavivāda Sutta

question

buddha

Whence so many arguments, disputes
and sorrow, lamentation, selﬁshness,
arrogance, pride and slander too?
Whence come all these? Please upon them speak.

₈₆₉

Much love of arguments, disputes,
means sorrow, lamentation, selﬁshness,
with arrogance, pride and slander too.
Inclined to selﬁshness, arguments, disputes;
quarrels, slander also come to birth.

₈₇₀

question

From what causes in the world there’s dearness, love,
these various greeds that wander in the world,
from these causes, hopes and their ends as well,
₈₇₁
these bring about a human being’s future.

buddha

From desires in the world as causes of the dear,
these various greeds that wander in the world,
from these causes, hopes and their ends as well,
these bring about a human being’s future.

₈₇₂

From what causes in the world is there desire,
and much deliberation on this—whence it comes?
And anger too, false-speaking, also doubtfulness,
and dharmas such as these by the Samaṇa declared

₈₇₃

“It’s pleasant, unpleasant”, so in the world they say
and depending on these arises desire,
but having seen forms, their arising and decay,
then a person in this world certainly deliberates.

₈₇₄

question

buddha

With¹⁰ anger, false-speaking, also doubtfulness,
¹⁰ Pleasant/unpleasant = duality

4.11 arguments and disputes

question

buddha

275

and all such dharmas, this quality exists.
The doubting person
in the knowledge-path should train
for the Samaṇa has declared dharmas
after having Known.

₈₇₅

The pleasant, the unpleasant, originate from what?
In the absence of what do these cease to be?
That which is being,¹¹ non-being as well,
what their origination, do tell me of this?

₈₇₆

“Touch”,¹² the origination of pleasant, unpleasant,
“Touch” being absent these cease to be.
That which is being, non-being as well,
its origin’s thus, I tell you of this.

₈₇₇

question

From what causes in the world does touch come to be
And whence does possessiveness also arise?
in the absence of what is “mine” making not?
₈₇₈
When what exists not are no “touches” touched?

buddha

“Touches” depend upon mind, upon form,
possessiveness caused by longing repeated,
when longing’s not found, possessiveness’s gone,
When form¹³ is no longer, no “touches” are “touched”. ₈₇₉

question

For one in what state does form cease to be,
how bliss and dukkha come to cease as well,
please do you tell me how these come to cease?
For this we would know—such is my intent.

¹¹ Being (bhava) = existence.
¹² Phassa = (roughly) “touch”.
¹³ Nāma-rūpa: name and form.

₈₈₀

276
buddha

sutta nipāta
Neither one of normal perception nor yet abnormal,
neither unperceiving no cessation of perception,
but form ceases for one who (has known) it thus:
Conceptual proliferation has perception as its cause.

₈₈₁

question

Whatever we’ve asked of you, to us you’ve explained,
another query we’d ask, please speak upon this,
those reckoned as wise here, do they say that
“purity of soul is just for this (life)”
₈₈₂
or do some of them state there’s another beyond?

buddha

Here some reckoned as wise do certainly say:
“Purity of soul is just for this life”;
but others who claim to be clever aver
that there is an occasion
for what has nothing leftover.¹⁴

₈₈₃

And Knowing that these are dependent on views,
having Known their dependence, the investigative Sage
since Liberated Knows, so no longer disputes,
₈₈₄
the wise one goes not from being to being.¹⁵
(Snp 869–884)

¹⁴ Sujato: I added this line, which was omitted by lkm.
¹⁵ Existence to existence.

4.12

Smaller Discourse on Quarrelling
Cūlaviyūha Sutta

question

buddha

question

buddha

Each attached to their own views,
They dispute, and the experts say,
“Whoever knows this understands the Dhamma,
Whoever rejects it is imprefect.”

₈₈₅

Arguing like this, they disagree, saying
“My opponent is a fool, and is no expert”
Which of these doctrines is the truth,
Since all of them say they are experts?

₈₈₆

If by not accepting another’s teaching
One became a fool of debased wisdom
Then, honestly, all are fools of debased wisdom,
Since all are attached to views.

₈₈₇

But if people are washed by their own views,
With pure wisdom, experts, thoughtful,
Then none of them has debased wisdom,
For their views are perfect.

₈₈₈

I don’t say, “This is how it is”,
Like the fools who oppose each other.
Each of them makes out that their view is the truth,
So they treat their opponent as a fool.

₈₈₉

What some say is the truth,
Others say is false.
So they argue, disagreeing;
Why don’t the ascetics teach one truth?

₈₉₀

Indeed the truth is one, there’s not another,
about this the One who Knows

278

buddha

sutta nipāta
does not dispute with another,
but the Samaṇas proclaim their varied “truths”
and so they speak not in the same way.

₈₉₁

Why do they speak such varied truths,
these so-called experts disputatious—
Are there really many and various truths
Or do they just rehearse their logic?

₈₉₂

Indeed, there are not many and varied truths
diﬀering from perception of the ever-true in the world;
but they work upon their views with logic:
₈₉₃
“Truth! Falsehood!” So they speak in dualities.
Based on what is seen, heard,
On precepts and vows, or what is cognized,
They look down on others.
Convinced of their own theories,
pleased with themselves,
They say, “My opponent is a fool, no expert.”

₈₉₄

They consider themselves expert for the same reasons
That they despise their opponent as a fool.
Calling themselves experts, they despise the other,
₈₉₅
Yet they speak the very same way.
And since perfected in some extreme view,
puﬀed with pride and maddened by conceit,
he anoints himself as though the master-mind,
likewise thinking his view’s perfected too.

₈₉₆

If their opponent says they are deﬁcient,
They too are of deﬁcient understanding.
But if they are wise and knowledgeable,
Then there are no fools among the ascetics.

₈₉₇

4.12 smaller discourse on quarrelling

279

“Anyone who teaches a doctrine other than this,
Has fallen short of purity and perfection.”
This is what followers of other paths say,
Passionately defending their very diﬀerent views.

₈₉₈

“Here alone is purity,” so they say,
“There is no purity in the teachings of others.”
This is what followers of other paths strongly assert,
Each entrenched in their own diﬀerent path.

₈₉₉

Strongly asserting their own path,
What opponent would they take to be a fool?
They would only bring trouble on themselves
By calling an opponent a fool of impure teachings.

₉₀₀

Convinced of their own theories,
Comparing others to oneself,
They get into more disputes with the world.
But by leaving behind all theories,
They don’t have any problems with the world.

₉₀₁

(Snp 885–901)

4.13

Greater Discourse on Quarrelling
Mahāviyūha Sutta

question

buddha

Regarding those people who hold to their views,
Arguing, “Only this is true!”
Should all of them be criticized,
Or are some praiseworthy also?

₉₀₂

This is a small thing, not enough for peace.
I say there are two outcomes of dispute;
Seeing this one should not dispute,
Recognizing that safety is a place without dispute.

₉₀₃

Regarding these widely-held opinions,
One who knows does not get involved with any of them.
Why would the uninvolved become involved,
Since they have no preferences
₉₀₄
In what is seen or heard?
Those who consider ethics to be the highest
Say that purity comes from self-restraint.
They undertake a vow and stick to it,
Thinking that only training in this way is there purity,
Declaring themselves experts,
₉₀₅
They go to future rebirths.
If he falls away from virtuous conduct and vows,
He is anxious, having failed in his task.
He yearns and longs for purity, as one far from home
₉₀₆
Who has lost his travelling companions.
But one who abandons all virtue and vows,
and deeds both blameless and blameworthy,
Does not long for either purity or impurity;
he lives detached, fostering peace.

₉₀₇

4.13 greater discourse on quarrelling

281

Dependent on ascetic practices,
Or on what is seen, heard, or thought,
They say that purity comes from continual transmigration,
₉₀₈
They are not free of craving for life after life.
One who yearns has longings,
And is anxious regarding their aspirations;
But for one here who has no falling away or reappearing,
Why would they be anxious,
₉₀₉
Or for what would they long?
question

buddha

The doctrine that some people call the ultimate,
Others say is deﬁcient.
Which of these speaks the truth?
For all of them say they are experts.

₉₁₀

They say their own doctrine is complete,
While that of others is deﬁcient.
Thus arguing they dispute,
Each taking what they agree upon to be the truth.

₉₁₁

If by criticizing an opponent
Their doctrine became deﬁcient,
There would be no distinguished doctrines,
Because it is common for people to speak
In defence of their own doctrines,
While making the other’s out to be deﬁcient.

₉₁₂

Indeed, the honoring of their own teachings
Is nothing other than praise of themselves;
If each doctrine were valid,
Then purity would be just a personal matter.

₉₁₃

The brahmin is not led by another,
Considering wisely, they do not grasp any teaching;

282

sutta nipāta
Therefore they go beyond disputes,
Since they see no other doctrine as best.

₉₁₄

Thinking, “I know, I see, this is how it is!”
Some fall back on view as purity.
Even if one has seen, what use is that to them?
Overstepping, they say purity
Comes by some other means.

₉₁₅

A person with vision sees mind and body,
And then knows only that much;
Let them see much or little,
The experts say purity does not come from that.

₉₁₆

One who speaks dogmatically,
Who’s settled down in view,
Will not be deferent, one not easily trained.
To that attached, his own views “pure”,
“pure path” according to what he’s seen.

₉₁₇

The paragon with wisdom comes not near
To following views, by partial knowledge bound.
Having known opinions of common people,
He’s equanimous, though others study them.

₉₁₈

The sage lets go of all ties to the world,
And when disputes come up they do not take sides;
Peaceful amid the agitated, they are equanimous,
They don’t hold on, thinking, “Let them hold on”.

₉₁₉

Former corruptions are abandoned,
While new ones are not created,
They have no biasses, and are not dogmatic.
The sage is freed from commitment to views,
Not clinging to the world, nor reproaching themselves. ₉₂₀

4.13 greater discourse on quarrelling

283

They have no enemies in the doctrines,
Whether seen, heard, or thought;
The sage is freed, having put down the burden,
Not planning, not wanting, not wishing.

₉₂₁

(Snp 902–921)

4.14

The Quick Way
Tuvaṭaka Sutta

question

buddha

I ask the Kinsman of the Sun, the great seeker,
About seclusion and the state of peace.
Seeing what is a bhikkhu quenched,
Not grasping at anything in the world?

₉₂₂

One should completely extract
The root of proliferation and reckoning—
The notion, “I am the thinker”.
One should train to dispel whatever craving
There is inside, ever mindful.

₉₂₃

Whatever principle they have known for themselves,
Whether internally or externally,
They would not be stubborn about that,
₉₂₄
For good people say that this is not quenching.
You shouldn’t, on that account, think you are better,
Or worse, or even the same;
Though aﬀected by many diﬀerent things,
You should not keep thinking of yourself.

₉₂₅

Totally calm within himself,
A bhikkhu would not seek peace from another;
For one who is at peace with themselves,
There is nothing to hold on to, still less to put down.

₉₂₆

As in the middle of the ocean,
There are no waves, but all is still,
So they would be still, unmoving;
A bhikkhu is not haughty at all.

₉₂₇

4.14 the quick way
question

buddha

You have taught me, with your eyes open,
Seeing principles for yourself, dispelling dangers;
Venerable sir, tell me the practice,
The rules of conduct and also meditation.

285

₉₂₈

Not letting their eyes wander,
Turning their ear from crass conversations,
Not greedy for ﬂavors,
And not thinking of anything in the world as “mine”. ₉₂₉
When things aﬄict him,
A bhikkhu would not whinge at all;
He would neither long for rebirth,
Nor tremble at dangers.

₉₃₀

He would not store up goods that he gets,
Whether food and drink,
Other edibles or cloth,
And he would not be afraid of not getting anything.

₉₃₁

Practising jhāna, not footloose,
Not remorseful, nor negligent;
That bhikkhu would stay in quiet
Places for meditation and sleep.

₉₃₂

They would not sleep much,
But be ardent, developing wakefulness;
They would abandon laziness, deceit, jokes, games,
And sex, together with other frivolities.

₉₃₃

One of my followers would not cast spells,
Or interpret dreams,
Nor would they practice astrology,
Prognosticate animal sounds,

286

sutta nipāta
Practice fertility magic,
Or [earn money] as a healer.

₉₃₄

A bhikkhu would not be anxious when criticized,
Nor puﬀed up when praised;
But would get rid of greed together with
Stinginess, anger, and slander.

₉₃₅

They would not continue at a trade,
A bhikkhu would not incur blame at all;
They would not linger in a village,
Nor cajole people hoping to get stuﬀ.

₉₃₆

A bhikkhu would not be boastful,
Nor speak with an ulterior motive;
He would not practice impudence,
Nor say things that were argumentative.

₉₃₇

He would not be carried away by lies,
Nor deliberately betray anyone;
Nor would he look down on anyone for their
Way of life, intelligence, virtue, or vows.

₉₃₈

Even if provoked by diﬀerent sayings,
Of ascetics or of ordinary people,
He would not answer harshly,
For good people make no enemies.

₉₃₉

Fully understanding this principle,
An inquiring bhikkhu would always train mindfully;
Knowing quenching as peace,
₉₄₀
He would not be negligent in Gotama’s teaching.
He overcomes, he is not overcome,
Seeing the Dhamma with his own eyes, not by hearsay;

4.14 the quick way

287

Therefore he would always respectfully train in accord,
₉₄₁
Diligent in the teaching of the Buddha.
(Snp 922–941)

4.15

“Assuming Forcefulness” and so on
Attadaṇḍa Sutta
Fear’s born assuming forcefulness¹⁶—
see how the people ﬁght!
I’ll tell you how I’m deeply moved,
how I have felt so stirred.

₉₄₂

Seeing how people ﬂounder
as ﬁsh in little water
attacking one the other
its fearfulness appeared.

₉₄₃

Once I wished a place to stay,
but all the world is essenceless,
turmoil in every quarter,
I saw no place secure.

₉₄₄

Folks’ never-ending enmity
I saw, took no delight,
but then I saw the hard-to-see,
the dart within the heart.

₉₄₅

Aﬀected by this dart
one runs in all directions
but with the dart pulled out
one neither runs nor sinks.

₉₄₆

On this, the training’s chanted thus:
Whatever bonds within the world¹⁷
they should not be pursued
knowing in depth all sense-desires
for Nirvāṇa train.

₉₄₇

¹⁶ Taking/grasping weapons.
¹⁷ Kāma: pleasure/desire.

4.15 assuming forcefulness

289

Truthful and not arrogant,
deceit none, slander, hate,
rid of greed’s evil, avarice
beyond them all’s the sage.

₉₄₈

Not sleepy, drowsy, slothful not,
living not with negligence,
taking no stand on arrogance:
that mind inclines to Nibbana.

₉₄₉

Be not into lying led,
for forms have no aﬀection,
know thoroughly conceit,
violence avoid fare thus.

₉₅₀

Delight not in the past,
nor be content with newness,
sad not with disappearance,
nor crave for the attractive.

₉₅₁

Greed I say’s “the great ﬂood”,
its torrent the rush of lust,
lust’s objects an imagining,
the swamp of lust is hard to cross.

₉₅₂

The sage on ﬁrm ground stands,
not swayed from truth, a paragon,
having relinquished All,
“peaceful” that one’s called.

₉₅₃

The wise indeed, all wisdom won,
on dharma not dependant,
wanders perfected in this world,
and envies none herein.

₉₅₄

290

sutta nipāta
Who sense-desires has crossed beyond,
undone worldly ties
and bondless, cut across the stream,
no longer grieves or broods.

₉₅₅

Let what’s “before” just wither up,
“after” for you be not a thing,
if then “between” you will not grasp,
You will fare at peace.

₉₅₆

For whom with mind-and-bodily forms
there is no “making-mine” at all,
grieves not when they are not,
and suﬀers here no loss.

₉₅₇

For whom there is no “this is mine”
nor no “To others it belongs”,
in whom “myself ” cannot be found,
Grieves not that “I have none”.

₉₅₈

Asked upon one unshakeable,
I tell of this one’s goodness:
Not harsh, not covetous at all,
Steadfast, impartial everywhere.

₉₅₉

For one who’s steadfast, Knows,¹⁸
That one does not accumulate,
Unattached to making eﬀort,
Sees security everywhere.

₉₆₀

A sage speaks not as though¹⁹
’Mong equal, low or high,
¹⁸ Capital “k” = enlightened.
¹⁹ No conceits or dialects of caste.

4.15 assuming forcefulness
Serene, devoid of avarice,
Does not accept or reject.

291

₉₆₁
(Snp 942–961)

4.16

Sāriputta asks the Buddha
Sāriputta Sutta

sāriputta Not seen before by me,

nor heard by anyone:
such sweetly-spoken Teacher
from Tusita came to lead a group.

₉₆₂

One by himself attained to bliss,
all darkness he dispelled,
so that the One-With-Eyes be seen
by world together with the gods.

₉₆₃

One’s who’s “Thus”, the unattached,
that Buddha undeceptive,
with many disciples, devotees,
for them I ask a question.²⁰

₉₆₄

For a monk avoiding society,
seeking out a lonely place—
bone yards, at the base of trees,
or caves within the mountain wastes—

₉₆₅

Living-places high or low,
How many are the terrors there,
that a monk in his silent place
trembles not at all?

₉₆₆

How many are the troubles here
for a monk to overcome,
while living in a place remote,
or going to the Ungone-Point.

₉₆₇

²⁰ Although Sāriputta is asking a question “for them”, it seems to be a question for
monks.

4.16 sāriputta

buddha

293

What ways of speaking would be his?
What place should he frequent?
What sorts of rules, kinds of vows,
For the monk with mind intent?

₉₆₈

What is the training he adopts,
one-pointed, mindful, wise;
to blow away all blemishes,
as does a smith with silver?

₉₆₉

As One who Knows I’ll explain to you,
what’s pleasant for you practicing avoidance,²¹
who live and who rest in a lonely abode,
wishing Awakening in keeping with Dharma.

₉₇₀

Within limits the mindful monk practices,
then of ﬁve fears is this wise one not afraid:
March-ﬂies and mosquitoes, of slithering snakes,
of men’s assaults, and ﬁerce four-footed beasts.

₉₇₁

Nor be disturbed by those with diﬀering Dharma,
even having seen their many perils,
further then, this seeker of the good
will overcome all fearfulness too.

₉₇₂

Aﬄicted by sicknesses, hunger as well,
the cold and strong heat he should endure,
by these many touches should he be unmoved,
having energy stirred and striving with strength.

₉₇₃

Neither should he steal, nor should he tell lies,
but let love suﬀuse the fearful and the unafraid,
and when his mind is agitated let him know
“This should be removed”—it’s on the Dark One’s side. ₉₇₄
²¹ It is diﬃcult to ﬁnd a verb to translate vijiguccha.

294

sutta nipāta
Into the power of anger and of arrogance
he shouldn’t fall, but ﬁrm, eradicate their roots,
all being attached he overcomes complete,
all that is dear to him, all that repels.

₉₇₅

With wisdom esteemed, with joy puriﬁed,
removing supports for all fearfulnesses,
let him conquer dislike for his lone lodging-place,
and conquer the four that cause him to lament:

₉₇₆

“Alas, what shall I eat” and “where indeed eat it”,
“last night l slept badly” and “where sleep today”—
one-in-training, a wanderer, of no ﬂag the follower
should such thoughts let go, leading to lamentation.

₉₇₇

Satisﬁed, receiving timely food and clothes,
knowing moderation in them, and
protected by them, in a village he’s restrained
though roughly he’s addressed, speaks no harsh word. ₉₇₈
With eyes cast down, feet not longing-guided,
to jhāna devoted, very watchful he should be,
let him grow in equanimity with mind composed,
check his scruples, how he inclines to doubt.

₉₇₉

With words of reproof let the mindful one rejoice,
and shatter his scorn for his fellow-celibates;
and utter skilful words at the proper time,
and think not upon views and beliefs of common folk. ₉₈₀
And then in the world, there are the dusty ﬁve
in which the mindful one guided, trains himself well,
lust overcoming to bodies and to sounds,
₉₈₁
to tastes, to perfumes and touches too.

4.16 sāriputta

295

And when in these things he has guided²² desire,
mindful, that bhikkhu of a well-liberated mind,
then he in due time thoroughly examining Dharma,
with mind become one he shall the darkness rend.

₉₈₂

Thus the Master spoke.
(Snp 962–982)

²² Vineyya: better translation than “dispel”, “disciplined”, “subdued” etc.

chapter 5

The Way to the Beyond
5.1

The Prologue Telling the Story
Vatthugāthā

narrator A brahmin who’d mastered all mantras,

Desiring the state of no-thingness,
From Kosalans’ fair city he left then
Towards the southern parts.

₉₈₃

By Godhāvarī river he sojourned
In Assaka’s realm near Alaka’s border,
Surviving on gleanings and fruit.

₉₈₄

Close by to him a village large,
With revenue derived from there,
Great the sacriﬁce he performed.

₉₈₅

With ritual oﬀerings made
For the sacriﬁce, he returned
To his hermitage again,
And there another brahmin came.

₉₈₆

Footsore and thirsty, he,
with teeth unclean, dust-covered head,

5.1 the prologue

bāvarī

brahmin

297

then approached him begging for
at least ﬁve hundred coins.

₉₈₇

Having seen him, Bāvarī
invited him to take a seat
and asked about his comfort, health—
then to the stranger spoke these words:

₉₈₈

Whatever was given for me to give,
All this I’ve given away,
So brahmin please forgive me,
I’ve not ﬁve hundred coins.

₉₈₉

If your honour will not give
To me who begs from him,
Then let your head be split apart
In seven days from now.

₉₉₀

narrator Having done preparatory rites

devī

That charlatan a fearful curse pronounced,
So that having heard his words
“one-with-dukkha” did Bāvarī become.

₉₉₁

He took no food and withered up,
aﬄicted with the dart of grief;
and then with mind of such a kind,
his heart enjoyed no jhāna.

₉₉₂

Seeing him suﬀering, terriﬁed,
a deva there who wished his good,
on drawing near to Bāvarī,
to him she spoke these words:

₉₉₃

He doesn’t know about the head,
that charlatan desiring wealth;

298

bāvarī

devī

bāvarī

devī

sutta nipāta
of heads, and splitting heads apart,
in him no knowing’s found.

₉₉₄

If my lady knows of this,
when asked, please tell me too;
let me hear your words on this,
on heads and splitting heads apart.

₉₉₅

I do not know about this thing,
in me no knowing’s found,
on heads and splitting heads apart
but by Victors it has been Seen.

₉₉₆

Who, then knows about this thing?
Who on this sphere of earth?
On heads and splitting heads apart,
O deva, tell me this.

₉₉₇

From out of Kapilavatthu town
came lately, Leader of the world,
a Sakyan son bringing light,
a scion of Okkāka king.

₉₉₈

He is indeed a Wakened One
all dharmas gone across,
all straightly-knowing’s power won,
in all dharmas, Seer,
to exhaustion of all dharmas won,
freed by all assets’ wearing out—

₉₉₉

One Awakened, lord of the world,
the Seer who teaches Dharma,
go to him and then enquire—
that matter he’ll explain.

₁₀₀₀

5.1 the prologue

299

narrator On hearing “Sambuddha”—that word,

bāvarī

devī

Bāvarī was overjoyed,
and grief diminished too,
while rapture then arose in him.
Glad at heart, overjoyed, in awe,
spoke Bāvarī to that devatā:

₁₀₀₁

In which village, in which town,
in which state is the world’s lord found?
Where should we go to honour him,
the All-awakened, best of men?

₁₀₀₂

In Kosala’s kingdom he dwells,
the greatly wise truly of Knowledge profound,
of Sakyas the scion, burdenless, from inﬂows free,
the eminent among men knows splitting the head.

₁₀₀₃

narrator Addressing then his brahmin pupils,

those who had mastered the mantras:
bāvarī

pupils

Come here, young brahmins, listen well
for I shall speak to you.

₁₀₀₄

Whose rare appearance in the world
is hard then to experience,
has appeared for us today,
acclaimed as All-awakened One,
quickly now go to Sāvatthī,
to see this Best of men.

₁₀₀₅

How, O brahmin, shall we know
on seeing him that he’s Awake?
Tell us, who are so ignorant,
that him we’ll recognize?

₁₀₀₆

300
bāvarī

sutta nipāta
In mantra-hymns come down to us,
the signs of Superman—
two and thirty there complete,
in order are described.

₁₀₀₇

Upon whose body these appear—
these signs of the Superman—
two possibilities are there for birth,
a third bourn is not found:

₁₀₀₈

So should he choose the household life,
this world he’ll conquer weaponless,
non-violently, without a sword,
by Dharma rule it righteously.

₁₀₀₉

But if he go forth from home
to the state of homelessness,
he’ll be Awake, removed the veils,
one of worth, the unexcelled.

₁₀₁₀

Question in your mind alone
my birth, my caste, how I appear,
my mantras, pupils and so on,
with heads and splitting heads apart.

₁₀₁₁

If he’s indeed the One Awake,
who, lacking obscurations, Sees;
to Questions asked in mind alone,
he will reply with words.

₁₀₁₂

narrator The voice of Bāvarī they heard,

those brahmin pupils—all sixteen:
Ajita, Tissamettayya,
Puṇṇaka, then there’s Mettagu,

₁₀₁₃

5.1 the prologue

301

Dhotaka, Upasīva then
Nanda, also Hemaka,
Todeyya, Kappa—just those two,
Jātukaṇṇa the learned one,

₁₀₁₄

Bhadrāvudha, Udaya and
as well the brahmin Posala,
Moghāraja the very wise
and Piṅgiya the greatest sage—

₁₀₁₅

All of them with their pupils’ groups
in all the world they’re famed—
enjoyers of jhāna, meditators Wise,
patterned by past good karmas made.

₁₀₁₆

Having bowed down to Bāvarī
and circumambulated him,
then in deer-skins clad, with dreadlocks all,
they headed for the north:

₁₀₁₇

From Patiṭṭhāna in Aḷaka’s land,
then to the city, Māhissati,
from there to Ujjeni and Gonaddha,
to Vedisa and to Vana town,

₁₀₁₈

Next to Kosambi and Sāketa,
and Sāvatthī of cities best
on to Setavya, Kapilavatthu,
Kusināra and surrounding lands,

₁₀₁₉

To Pāvā and to Bhoga town,
to the Māgadhans’ city of Vesāli,
to the rocky Pāsāṇaka Shrine—
delightful, mind-delighting place.

₁₀₂₀

302

ajita

buddha

sutta nipāta
As a person thirsty for water,
or merchant for proﬁt great,
or a sunburnt person seeks for shade,
so they hastily climbed the Rock.

₁₀₂₁

The Lord on that occasion was
in honour seated with the bhikkhu-Saṅgha,
teaching Dharma to all the monks,
as lion roaring in the jungly woods.

₁₀₂₂

Ajita saw then the Sambuddha
as the sun’s brilliance devoid of rays,
or as the moon completely full,
arrived at its ﬁfteenth day.

₁₀₂₃

Then standing to one side he saw
the set of signs complete
upon the Buddha’s body, so
joyful, in his mind he asked:

₁₀₂₄

Speak now about my Master’s age,
tell of his clan and body-marks,
say how far he’s mastered the mantras
and how many the brahmins he instructs.

₁₀₂₅

His age is a hundred and twenty years,
by clan he is a Bāvarī,
upon his body appear three signs,
Three Vedas he has mastered all.

₁₀₂₆

In lore of signs and legends in tradition—
in the glossaries and the ritual treatises—
in his own Dharma to perfection he’s arrived,
and ﬁve hundred students he instructs.

₁₀₂₇

5.1 the prologue
ajita

buddha

303

O highest of men, with craving cut,
describe in detail all the signs
upon the body of Bāvarī,
so there may be no doubt in us.

₁₀₂₈

Cover his face with his tongue he can,
hair grows between his brows,
ensheathed is the cloth-concealed:
Know this, O brahmin youth.

₁₀₂₉

narrator Now none there heard the questions asked,

ajita

buddha

but all the answers heard;
then the people, overjoyed,
with lotussed hands they thought:

₁₀₃₀

What deva indeed, whether Brahma
or Indra or Sujampati—
these questions asked in mind,
to whom are they addressed?

₁₀₃₁

Bāvarī has questioned you
on heads and splitting heads apart.
O Lord, do you explain this,
dispel our doubt, O Sage.

₁₀₃₂

Know ignorance as “head”,
gnosis as that which “splits the head”,
with mindfulness, meditation, faith
by determination, eﬀort too.

₁₀₃₃

narrator Then the young brahmin overawed,

with great emotion overcome,
(respectfully) with his deerskin (cloak)
over one shoulder (placed),
put his head at (the Buddha’s) feet.

₁₀₃₄

304
ajita

buddha

sutta nipāta
Sir, the brahmin Bāvarī,
with all his pupils too,
overjoyed, glad-minded,
to the great Seer’s feet bowed down.

₁₀₃₅

May all be well with Bāvarī,
with his brahmin pupils too,
and you as well be happy,
live long O brahmin youth!

₁₀₃₆

Bāvarī, yourself as well
and all the rest have many doubts,
ask now whatever’s in your minds—
you have the opportunity.

₁₀₃₇

So permitted by the All-awake,
Ajita sat, and with lotussed hands,
asked the initial question,
addressed to the Tathāgata.

₁₀₃₈
(Snp 983–1038)

The Signs of a Superman: A commentary on verses 1007, 1024,
and 1029
Before this strange subject is examined, its cultural background needs
reﬂection. Brahmins of the Aryan peoples who settled at ﬁrst in N.W.
India had a great opinion of themselves. Though in times more ancient than that there had been women among them who were experts
in rituals, knowing all the mantras, by the times of the Buddha all
brahmin priests were men. As many of these priests after listening
to the words of the Buddha became his disciples and many ordained
as bhikkhus, they brought with them their underlying sense of male
superiority. This has been transferred by them through chanting, to

5.1 the prologue

305

the Suttas. Among these brahminical relics are the strange legends of
the Superman which within the Buddhadharma apply to only perfectly
Awakened Buddhas and Dharma-wheel turning emperors. Within Snp
it is interesting to notice that the verses we are concerned with appear
in connection with brahmins. We should also be aware that there are
other Suttas, for instance MN 115 or AN 1.268–295, which raise the
related subject of the Impossibles, that lay down the law that women
cannot be either Supermen as a Buddha, or as Dharma-emperor, ruling
the entire world. The reasons why this is said to be is not made very
clear. The Dharma is said to be “just like this and not otherwise”.
The list of 32 signs upon the bodies of a Superman (mahā-purisalakkhaṇa) were, for those who knew how to read them, clear evidence
of their spiritual attainment—a view in sharp contrast to the Buddha’s
actual teachings. That they have survived for such a long time even
into the present, is shown by newly-made images of the Buddha whose
feet often have lotus-ﬂowers upon their soles. The prime source of
the list of the 32 is found in the Long Discourses (DN 30, Lakkhaṇa
Sutta). This Sutta tries to explain in terms of cause (karma), eﬀect
(the physical “signs”) the various and sometimes curious marks of the
Superman. The order of these signs in the following list diﬀers from
their explanation later in the Lakkhaṇa Sutta. There appears to be little
reason in this so-called cause and eﬀect. Scholars have suggested that
the Lakkhaṇa Sutta is a later production by bhikkhus after the passing
of the Buddha.
I have followed the translation of this list by Maurice Walshe in his
Dīgha-nikāya, Thus Have I Heard, later re-issued as Long Discourses of
the Buddha. My own explanations and exclamations follow in brackets.
1. He has feet with level tread. (This sounds like ﬂat footedness.)
2. On the soles of his feet are wheels with the thousand spokes,
complete with felloe and hub. (Seen on Buddha-images seated
in Vajra-positions/full-lotus.)

306

sutta nipāta

3. He has projecting heels. (Occasional standing Buddha-images in
Thailand have this.)
4. He has long ﬁngers and toes. (Sometimes in Buddha-images this
is taken to mean that ﬁngers are of the same length, the same
with toes.)
5. He has soft and tender hands and feet. (Thus making him of high
caste.)
6. His hands and feet are netlike. (Reticulation of veins under the
skin.)
7. He has high-raised ankles. (Short legs? Long feet?)
8. His legs are like an antelope’s. (Slender and well-shaped.)
9. Standing and without bending he can touch and rub his knees
with either hand. (Results in ill-proportioned ape-like images.)
10. His male organs are enclosed in a sheath (The ﬁrst of Bāvarī’s
signs commented on below. Literally the Pāli says: “ensheathed
is the cloth-concealed”—devoid of meaning unless one knows
what this euphemism hides.)
11. His complexion is bright, the colour of gold.
12. His skin is delicate and so smooth that no dust can adhere to his
body.
13. His body-hairs are separate, one to each pore. (Is this not usual
for humans?)
14. His body-hairs grow upwards, each blue-black like collyrium.
(Used as a cosmetic.)
15. His body is divinely straight.
16. He has the seven convex surfaces.
17. The front of his body is like a lion’s.
18. There is no hollow between his shoulder blades.
19. He is proportioned like a banyan tree. (The height of the body is
the same as the span of his outstretched arms.)
20. His chest is evenly rounded.
21. He has a perfect sense of taste. (But how did others know this?)

5.1 the prologue

307

22. He has jaws like a lion’s. (But such jaws are for piercing and
tearing!)
23. He has 40 teeth. (But how could a normal human jaw accommodate them?)
24. His teeth are even.
25. There are no spaces between his teeth.
26. His canine teeth are very bright.
27. His tongue is very long. (The second of Bāvarī’s marks.)
28. He has a Brahma-like voice. (Like that of a kāravika-bird.)
29. His eyes are deep blue.
30. He has eyelashes like a cow’s.
31. The hair between his eyes is white and soft like cotton-down.
(The third of Bāvarī’s marks.)
32. His head is like a royal turban. (That is, his head rises to a protuberance at the top of his head—see many Buddha-images.)
A superman with even a few of these marks would be freakish
to our eyes, even if only a male child. When grown it would hardly
impress by its strange appearance, even though this was supposed to
signify superior spirituality. The meanings of some signs are obscure,
though the Pāli Commentaries try to provide convincing explanations.
An example of this, which is rather important, is No. 10: “ensheathed
is the cloth-concealed.” Even when Pāli Dictionaries have been consulted and “cloth-concealed” is revealed as male genitalia, we are no further towards understanding what “ensheathed” refers to. Saddhātissa’s
translation is rather coy with “the foreskin completely covers the phallus”. But such a rationalist rendering fails to make clear what could be
wonderful about this! As marks of a Superman, all of these thirty-two
should be exceptional in some way, while to say that the male organ
is sheathed by the foreskin is no more than indicating the ordinary
man’s equipment. Presumably both penis and testes are meant to be
covered by a ﬂap of skin but then how could the former be used, even
for urination? Do they have to be “ensheathed” because the supposed

308

sutta nipāta

brahmin authors of this list were shy about making their meaning
clearer? Or were the authors, Buddhist monks, similarly shy? The literal meaning sounds as though the Superman had some sort of sexual
abnormality which could not be discussed, which is puzzling when
we remember that prior to Buddhahood, he procreated a son, Rahula,
apparently normally. It could be that celibate monks who suﬀered conﬂicts between a code of rules (the Pāṭimokkha) and their own sexuality
thought it best to mystify the Buddha’s body. But then, this eﬀort to see
as though through fog—“ensheathed is the cloth-concealed”—hardly
agrees with the Buddha’s occasional revealing of his sexual organs
to convince doubtful brahmins that he possessed all of the signs of a
superman (see for example MN 91). Whichever way this is regarded it
is an unsolvable problem.
Bāvarī’s two other marks or signs present lesser problems. In the
above translation of Snp 1029 the ﬁrst line reads “Cover his face with
his tongue he can,” certainly not an ordinary feat. If an explanation is
needed then it may be noticed that some practitioners of yoga as part
of a practice for limiting the ordinary way of breathing restrain this
by cutting the ligament under the tongue, a frenum, so that the tongue
can be turned back into the throat. This would enable also the tongue
to be extended further over the face.
As for the second of these, “hair grows between his brows”, this
seems to be a hairy male. Buddha-images are found with this mark
between the eyebrows. This is certainly not as special as the other two
signs.
The list remains the only Sutta passage to give an all-round account
of what the Buddha may have looked like, apart from occasional references, mostly in verse, to his handsome features. See for instance
verses 554–557 in this book which also mention “the signs peculiar to
the Superman”.

5.2

Ajita’s Questions
Ajitamāṇavapucchā

ajita

buddha

ajita

buddha

ajita

buddha

The world, by what it’s wrapped?
and why it shines not forth?
say too with what it’s smeared?
and what’s its greatest fear?

₁₀₃₉

The world is wrapped by Ignorance;
It shines not forth due to doubt and negligence;
Its smeared by longing,
And suﬀering is its greatest fear.

₁₀₄₀

The streams are ﬂowing everywhere,
how can the streams be blocked,
say how the streams may be restrained?
by what the streams are dammed?

₁₀₄₁

Whatever streams are in the world,
they may be blocked by mindfulness—
that I say is streams’ restraint;
by wisdom they are dammed.

₁₀₄₂

So wisdom it is and mindfulness!
Now, sir, I ask you, tell me this:
the namer-mind, the bodily form—
where does it cease to be?

₁₀₄₃

That question asked by you
I tell about it now,
the namer-mind and bodily form
where they cease to be:
by cessation of the consciousness,
they wholly cease to be.

₁₀₄₄

310
ajita

buddha

sutta nipāta
Who have the Dharma measured up,
who train themselves, the multitude,
how, sir, do they behave themselves?
please answer what I speak.

₁₀₄₅

No greediness in pleasures of sense,
having a tranquil mind and clear,
skilled in all the Dharma’s ways—
that mindful bhikkhu who’s left home.

₁₀₄₆
(Snp 1039–1046)

5.3

Tissamettaya’s Questions
Tissamettayamāṇavapucchā

tissa

buddha

Who has contentment in the world?
Who is not agitated?
Who has experienced both extremes,
but wise, in the middle does not stick?
Who do you say’s a person great?
Who, seamstress-craving’s gone beyond?

₁₀₄₇

A pure life leading ’mid pleasures of sense,
ever mindful and craving-free,
a bhikkhu cool, after reﬂection deep,
agitation’s none in such a one.

₁₀₄₈

Who has experienced both extremes,
who wise, in the middle does not stick,
he, I say, is a person great,
who the seamstress-craving’s gone beyond.

₁₀₄₉

(Snp 1047–1049)

5.4

Puṇṇaka’s Questions
Puṇṇakamāṇavapucchā

puṇṇaka

I have come with a question for you,
The immovable, seer of the root;
Subject to what do the sages, people,
Nobles, and brahmins oﬀer many kinds of sacriﬁces
To gods here in the world?
₁₀₅₀
Lord Buddha, please tell me this.

buddha

Whatever sages, people,
Nobles, and brahmins oﬀer many kinds of sacriﬁces
To gods here in the world,
Do so wishing to be reborn, Puṇṇaka;
₁₀₅₁
Subject to old age they oﬀer their sacrﬁces.

puṇṇaka

Whatever sages, people,
Nobles, and brahmins oﬀer many kinds of sacriﬁces
To gods here in the world,
Did they, diligently following the way of sacriﬁce,
Cross over birth and old age, sir?
₁₀₅₂
Lord Buddha, please tell me this.

buddha

Hoping, praying, longing, and sacriﬁcing,
Longing for sensual pleasures
That are dependent on getting things;
I declare that they, devoted to sacriﬁce
And besotted by rebirth,
Did not cross over birth and old age.

puṇṇaka

If, sir, those devoted to sacriﬁce
Did not thereby cross over birth and old age,
Then who in the world of gods and men

₁₀₅₃

puṇṇaka

5.4 puṇṇaka’s questions

313

Has crossed over birth and old age?
Lord Buddha, please tell me this.

₁₀₅₄

Having scrutinized the world near and far,
One who has no disturbances at all in the world,
Peaceful, clear, without aﬄiction or desire,
Such a one has crossed over
Birth and old age, I declare.

₁₀₅₅

(Snp 1050–1055)

5.5

Mettagū’s Questions
Mettagūmāṇavapucchā

mettagū

buddha

Reached Vedas’ end, I deem, developed yourself,
so I ask the Lord thus, please tell me of this:
how then have resulted these various dukkhas
of various forms found in the world?

₁₀₅₆

On dukkha’s arising you’ve asked me indeed,
so as I have Known, I impart it to you:
The diverse-formed dukkhas come to exist
from attachments to asset of whatever kind.

₁₀₅₇

That ignorant one attached indeed to assets,
stupidly reaches to dukkha repeatedly,
therefore that one in seeing dukkha’s birth and arising,
₁₀₅₈
such attached-to assets should not be created.
mettagū

buddha

mettagū

Whatever we asked, to us you explained,
another thing I ask, please speak upon that:
how do the wise ones cross over the ﬂood
of birth and decay, lamentation and grief?
O Sage, do well declare this to me now,
for certainly this dharma has been known by you.

₁₀₅₉

This Dharma I’ll explain to you,
Seen-now and not traditional law,
knowing which the mindful fare,
and cross the world’s entanglements.

₁₀₆₀

I am delighted, Seeker Great,
with this Dharma ultimate,
knowing which the mindful fare,
and cross the world’s entanglements.

₁₀₆₁

buddha

mettagū

buddha

5.5 mettagū’s questions

315

Whatever you cognize above,
below, across and in between,
consciously dispel delight in them,
and settling-down—in “being” you’ll not stand.

₁₀₆₂

Mindfully who live like this, aware,
such bhikkhus, let go of “making-mine”
with birth and decay, lamenting and grief:
just here do the wise all dukkha let go.

₁₀₆₃

With the Great Seeker’s speech I am overjoyed,
well explained, O Gotama, is “assets unattached”,
for surely the Lord all dukkha has let go,
for certainly this Dharma has been Known by you.

₁₀₆₄

Those who the Sage always advises,
surely they’re able to let go of dukkha,
to the Nāga drawn near, to you I bow down;
maybe the Lord will advise me as well.

₁₀₆₅

Knowing well that brahmin true to Love’s end¹ reached,
having nought and unattached to sensual being,
for certain that one this ﬂood has overcrossed,
crossed to the Far Shore, free of doubts and harshness. ₁₀₆₆
This is one who Knows, reached Love’s end just here,
cut bondage to any being, either high or low,
free from craving and desire, free from distress,
₁₀₆₇
I say such one’s crossed over birth and decay.
(Snp 1056—1067)

¹ Sujato: The term translated by lkm in this and the next verse as “love’s end” is
vedagū. This is a Brahmanical term referring to one accomplished in the three Vedas,
and interpreted by the Buddha as one perfected in liberating knowledge. Perhaps
lkm renders veda as “love” rather than “knowledge” due to the speaker’s name,
mettagū. In some cases veda and its derivates, such as vedanā, extend in meaning to
“emotion”.

5.6

Dhotaka’s Questions
Dhotakamāṇavapucchā

dhotaka

buddha

dhotaka

O Seeker Great, I long to hear your word,
then having heard your speech,
for Nirvāṇa train myself—
I ask the Lord thus, please tell me of this.

₁₀₆₈

Ascetically exert yourself,
just wise and mindful here,
then having heard my words,
for Nirvāṇa train yourself.

₁₀₆₉

In the world of devas and humanity I see
the with-nothing brahmin who wanders about,
to the All-seeing Seer, to you I bow down:
free me, O Sakya, from consuming doubt.

₁₀₇₀

buddha

I am not able, O Dhotaka, to liberate you
from consuming doubt of whatever kind in the world,²
but, having Known this Dharma best
₁₀₇₁
beyond this ﬂood you go across.

dhotaka

Teach me, O Brahma, out of your compassion,
the State of Seclusion that I may know it well,
so that I may live just like the sky,
kind-minded, peaceful, also clinging-free.

buddha

₁₀₇₂

This Peace I shall explain to you,
Seen-Now and not traditional lore,

² Sujato: lkm had “To liberate, O Dhotaka, from consuming doubt, I do not go about
the world”, which relied on the variant reading gamissāmi. This however appears to
be incorrect, and I have adopted the reading sahissāmi as used in the Mahāsaṅgīti
text; see Norman’s note on page 410 of the Group of Discourses.

dhotaka

buddha

5.6 dhotaka’s questions

317

knowing which the mindful fare,
and cross the world’s entanglements.

₁₀₇₃

I am delighted, Seeker Great
with this Peace that’s ultimate,
knowing which the mindful fare,
and cross the world’s entanglements.

₁₀₇₄

Whatever you cognize above,
below, across, and in between;
Here having Known clinging just to this,
form no craving for high or low.

₁₀₇₅
(Snp 1068–75)

5.7

Upasīva’s Questions
Upasīvamāṇavapucchā

upasīva

buddha

upasīva

buddha

upasīva

buddha

upasīva

Alone, O Sakya, unsupported too,
the mighty ﬂood I do not dare to cross,
All-seeing One, please tell me of the means
using which I may overpass the ﬂood.

₁₀₇₆

Mindfully do you no-thingness regard,
rely on “there-is-not” to go across the ﬂood,
abandon conversation, let go of sense-desires,
See craving’s exhaustion by night and by day.

₁₀₇₇

That one who’s unattached to sense-desires,
relying on no-thingness, left others aside,
freed in the highest of consciousness’s freedom,
will that one be established, or fall away from this?

₁₀₇₈

That one who’s unattached to sense-desires,
relying on no-thingness, left others aside,
freed in the highest of consciousness’s freedom,
that one will be established, not fall away from this.

₁₀₇₉

Should that one remain even for a heap of years,
O all-Seeing One, but still not fall away?
Would that one liberated cool-become just there,
consciousness ceased in that very state?

₁₀₈₀

As ﬂame blown out by force of wind
has gone to its “goal”, cannot be described,
likewise the Sage “in mind and body” freed:
gone to the Goal and cannot be described.

₁₀₈₁

Does one not exist who’s reached the Goal?
Or does one dwell forever free?

5.7 upasīva’s questions

buddha

319

O Sage, do well declare this to me now,
for certainly this dharma’s known by you.

₁₀₈₂

Of one who’s reached the Goal, no measure’s found,
there is not that by which one could be named,
when dharmas for that one are emptied out,
emptied are the ways of telling too.

₁₀₈₃

(Snp 1076–1083)

5.8

Nanda’s Questions
Nandamāṇavapucchā

nanda

buddha

People say that in the world
there are sages—how is this?
Do they say “sage” for knowledge won,
or for a certain way of life?

₁₀₈₄

The intelligent ones say not “a sage”,
for view, tradition, knowledge won;
those foeless, desireless and free from distress
who so fare along are sages, I say.

₁₀₈₅

nanda

Some of these monks and brahmins they say
that purity comes from the seen and the heard,
from rites and from vows and from other things too,
have they, O Lord, while practising thus
crossed over birth and crossed decay, sir?
₁₀₈₆
I ask the Lord thus, please tell me of this.

buddha

Some of these monks and brahmins they say
that purity comes from the seen and the heard,
from rites and from vows and from other things too
and even though they have practised thus,
I say they’ve not crossed over birth and decay.

nanda

₁₀₈₇

Some of these monks and brahmins they say
that purity comes from the seen and the heard,
from rites and from vows and from other things too,
if you say, O Sage, they’ve not crossed the ﬂood,
who fares through the world of devas, mankind,
crossed over birth and crossed decay, sir?
₁₀₈₈
I ask the Lord thus, please tell me of this.

5.8 nanda’s questions

321

buddha

Of these monks and these brahmins I do not say
that all are shrouded by birth and decay:
those who’ve let go of the seen, heard, and known,
of rites and of vows and others—all,
completely craving Known and from the inﬂows free—
₁₀₈₉
those persons I say have crossed over the ﬂood.

nanda

By the Great Seeker’s words I’m truly delighted
well-explained, O Gotama, is “to assets unattached”,
those who’ve let go of the seen, heard and known,
of rites and of vows and of other things—all,
completely craving Known and from the inﬂows free—
₁₀₉₀
also I say they’ve crossed over the ﬂood.
(Snp 1084–1090)

5.9

Hemaka’s Questions
Hemakamāṇavapucchā

hemaka

buddha

Those elders outside Gotama’s teaching-path
explained their doctrines in this way:
“so it was and so will be”—
all that was but traditional lore,
all that increased uncertainty,
And I took no delight in it.

₁₀₉₁

Please, O Sage, explain to me
Dhamma destroying craving now,
knowing which the mindful fare,
and cross the world’s entanglements.

₁₀₉₂

Here among all those pleasing things—
the seen and the heard, the sensed and thought—
whose wants removed and passion too—
this the unchanging Nirvāṇa-state.

₁₀₉₃

With Final Knowledge those mindful ones,
now-seen the Dharma, cool-become
and ever they at peace remain,
they’ve crossed the world’s entanglements.

₁₀₉₄

(Snp 1091–1094)

5.10

Todeyya’s Questions
Todeyyamāṇavapucchā

todeyya

buddha

todeyya

buddha

In whom do sense-desires dwell not
and craving can’t be found,
crossed beyond consuming doubt—
what’s freedom for this one?

₁₀₉₅

In whom do sense-desires dwell not
and craving can’t be found,
crossed beyond consuming doubt—
than this, is freedom not apart.

₁₀₉₆

No inclinations or with longings still?
One with wisdom wanting, or with wisdom won?
Explain to me please, O All-seeing Sakya,
how I may well discern a sage.

₁₀₉₇

No inclinations at all and no longings left,
not one with wisdom wanting but one with wisdom won
know as a sage, Todeyya, one who nothing owns,
₁₀₉₈
one who is to sensual being unattached.
(Snp 1095–1098)

5.11

Kappa’s Question
Kappamāṇavapucchā

kappa

buddha

In midstream standing there,
in ﬂood’s fearsome surge—
oppressed by age and death,
of the island tell me, sir,
do tell me of this isle,
where this will be no more.

₁₀₉₉

In midstream standing there,
in ﬂood’s fearsome surge
oppressed by age and death, Kappa,
of the island I shall tell.

₁₁₀₀

“Owning nothing and unattached”
that’s the isle of no-beyond,
Nirvāṇa do I call it
death-decay destroyed.

₁₁₀₁

With Final Knowledge these mindful ones,
Now-seen the Dharma, cool-become,
they’re neither under Māra’s sway
nor Māra’s followers.

₁₁₀₂

(Snp 1099–1102)

5.12

Jatukaṇṇi’s Questions
Jatukaṇṇimāṇavapucchā

jatukaṇṇi I’ve heard of the heroic one

buddha

from desires free for pleasures sensuous,
with Question I come for the ﬂood-crosser,
from desire free
O Lord with Eye innate, tell me the Peaceful State—
how truly it is, tell me of this.

₁₁₀₃

The Lord comports himself as the senses’ conqueror
as the hot sun the earth by its heat,
of small wit am I, Thou of wisdom great,
explain to me Dharma that I may understand.

₁₁₀₄

The abandonment here of birth and old age,
greed for sensual pleasures curb,
and safety see in letting-go,
let there not be found in you
grasping or rejection.

₁₁₀₅

Dry up whatever’s gone “before”,
while “after” have no thing at all;
if in the “middle” you don’t grasp,
you’ll fare in Perfect Peace.

₁₁₀₆

O brahmin, from greediness free
for every sort of name-and-form,
the inﬂows are not found by which
one’d go beneath death’s sway.

₁₁₀₇
(Snp 1103–1107)

5.13

Bhadrāvudha’s Question
Bhadrāvudhamāṇavapucchā

bhadra

With home let go, craving cut and undisturbed,
delight let go, crossed the ﬂood and free,
time let go and truly wise—I beg of you—
various people here from provinces assembled;

₁₁₀₈

O Hero, they’re longing for your words,
do well declare these to them now,
for certainly this Dharma has been Known by you,
then having heard the Nāga they’ll depart from here. ₁₁₀₉
buddha

Beyond all acquisitive craving you should train,
above, below, across and in between,
whatever is grasped at in the world,
with that does Māra that person pursue.

₁₁₁₀

Knowing this, therefore the mindful bhikkhu
in all worlds grasps not anything,
understanding well those acquisitive beings,
those people adhering to the realm of death.

₁₁₁₁

(Snp 1108–1111)

5.14

Udaya’s Questions
Udayamāṇavapucchā

udaya

buddha

udaya

buddha

udaya

To the contemplative seated free of dust,
done what should be done, with inﬂows none,
to the one beyond all dharmas gone,
to him with a question have I come:
Please say by shattering ignorance
how Final Knowledge’s free.

₁₁₁₂

Let go desires for pleasures of sense,
with all bad-mindedness as well,
sloth dispel and check remorse,

₁₁₁₃

poised mindfulness completely pure,
forerun by Dharma-distinguishing:
I say by shattering ignorance,
there’s Final Knowledge free.

₁₁₁₄

What’s the fetter of the world?
and what the world’s wandering?
By abandonment of what
is it Nirvāṇa named?

₁₁₁₅

Enjoyment: the fetter of the world,
while thinking, the world’s wandering,
the letting-go of craving—
it’s Nirvāṇa named.

₁₁₁₆

How is consciousness broken up
in one who practises mindfully?
To the Lord we come with this question,
we wish to hear your words.

₁₁₁₇

328
buddha

sutta nipāta
Feeling both within, without—
in that do not delight,
thus consciousness is broken up
in one who practises mindfully.

₁₁₁₈
(Snp 1112–1118)

5.15

Posāla’s Question
Posālamāṇavapucchā

posāla

buddha

To One illuming the past,
the undisturbed who’s cut oﬀ doubt,
Gone across the dharmas all,
with this question have I come:

₁₁₁₉

In whom are no perceptions of form,
abandoned it in bodies all,
who sees within, without “there’s nought”,
of such a one, what knowledge known
how will such a one be led?

₁₁₂₀

The Tathāgata knows thoroughly
all supports of consciousness:
knows this one as stuck,
that one freed, or bound for the beyond.

₁₁₂₁

Having known the existence of no-thingness
together with its bond of indulgence,
then investigating this and seeing that,
just this is the knowledge of a brahmin perfected.

₁₁₂₂

(Snp 1119–1122)

5.16

Mogharāja’s Question
Mogharājamāṇavapucchā

moghar.

buddha

The Sakyan I’ve requested twice
but the Seer has not replied;
I have heard tell that questioned thrice,
a Sage divine explains.

₁₁₂₃

I do not understand the view
of the renowned Gotama
upon this world, the other world,
on Brahma’s realm, the deva’s world.

₁₁₂₄

So to the One of vision supreme,
with this query have I come:
how should one regard the world
that the Death-king sees one not?

₁₁₂₅

Be ever mindful, Mogharāja,
and as empty, view the world,
with view of self pulled up,
and thus crossed over death—
who sees the world like this
the King of Death sees not.

₁₁₂₆
(Snp 1123–1126)

5.17

Piṅgiya’s Question
Piṅgiyamāṇavapucchā

piṅgiya

Aged am I, feeble and my beauty ﬂed,
my eyes no longer clear, my hearing weak,
let me not die confused along the way,
teach me the Dharma so that I shall know
how to let go of birth and of decay.

₁₁₂₇

buddha

Having seen them smitten by (the sight of ) forms,
by bodily forms those careless folk are beaten down,
therefore, Piṅgiya, you should be aware:
₁₁₂₈
let go this bodily form so as not to be reborn.³

piṅgiya

There’s nothing in the world: four directions chief,
four intermediates, above, below, ten in all—
unseen, unheard, not felt or known by you;
teach to me Dharma so that when I’ve known it
birth and ageing are both abandoned here.

₁₁₂₉

Seeing humanity by cravings aﬄicted—
burnt by being born, overcome by age,
therefore, Piṅgiya, you should be aware:
let go of craving so as not to be reborn.

₁₁₃₀

buddha

(Snp 1127–1130)

Notes on Verses 1039–1130
1039: The world (citta) in ﬁrst line. The world as exterior is more often
loka in Pāli. But loka and citta are closely interrelated in Buddhist
Suttas.
³ Sujato: lkm had “let go these forms for not again becoming”, which I found barely
intelligible; I similarly changed the last line of verse 1130. In addition, this verse
contains a grammatical mistake, as rūpa here is singular.

332

sutta nipāta

1043: Namer-mind: in Pāli this is nāma, that which gives names to
things. These two words, from Pāli, and from English, are etymologically related.
1047: The Tissametteyya who asks this question is unlikely to be the
one who is addressed in Snp 4.7.
Line 3: Extremes (in views and practices) never approved
by the Buddha. In Pāli anta (close to English “end”) is usually
translated “extreme”.
Line 5: A “great person” in the Buddhist sense, rather than
the Hindu.
Line 6: Sibbani—seamstress. The seamstress who sews together saṁsāra, the round of birth and death.
1053: Some brahmins made oﬀerings to gods in order to procure the
results of sense/sex enjoyment.
1069: Live a frugal life without indulgence or bodily self-torture—
either extreme.
1068–75: The Buddhas does not teach Dhotaka what he asks, so there are
two possibilities; The text is lost or corrupted, or, the Buddha
taught with these few words, which were accompanied by a
mind-transmission.
1077: Nothingness: the nature of all that can be conceived—no essence,
and no views about permanence.
1081: “Mind and body” in Theravāda; translated as “body-group” by
some authors.
1083: “Emptied” is better translation than “removed, destroyed or abolished” as used by Ven. Ñāṇamoli.
1084: Muni was used by all practitioners of Dharma, not only Buddha.
1085: “Fare” is the only English word meaning both journey/travel
as well as practice Dharma which is regarded as a journey. The
verb carati also has the two meanings of ordinary and spiritual
journeys.
1086: The seen and the heard is placing reliance upon the ways that

5.17 piṅgiya’s question

333

unimportant things are done (such as putting on robes) and not
paying attention to really important matters (such as ageing and
death).
1090: The last line of this verse: is this Nanda’s agreement with the
Buddha or does this contain his conceit that he too has the same
view?
1091: Teaching or path or generally meaning religion. It is hard to ﬁnd
an English word to ﬁt all the meanings of sāsana.
1107: Name and form: nāma-rūpa. Nāma is mind generally, while rūpa
is body.
1112: “seated free of dust” refers to mental-emotional dust.
1122: no-thingness: does not mean the arūpa (formless) attainment in
meditation.⁴ “Brahmin” here in the Buddhist sense.
1123: Twice the Buddha did not reply to Mogharāja. But the third time
this mind had settled down. Suñña means emptiness of persons,
ego, selfhood, ownership etc. It does not mean “nothing”.

⁴ Sujato: I am not sure why lkm says this. Both here and elsewhere in these verses
it seems clear that the Brahmin students are in fact referring to the formless attainments. It will be recalled that these were the same attainments which, in the
story of the Bodhisattva’s period of seeking before enlightenment, were attributed
to various (probably Brahmanical) teachers.

5.18

Epilogue: In Praise of the Way to the Beyond
Pārāyanatthutigāthā

The Radiant One said this while he stayed among the Magadhese at the
Pāsānika Shrine. There he was asked, then he questioned, the sixteen
brahmin pupils, answering their questions. If one should understand
the meaning of even one question, and then practise the Dharma according to the Dharma, then one would go to the farther shore beyond
ageing and death. As this Dharma leads to the farther shore it is known
as the Teaching leading to the Farther Shore (pārāyana).
narrator Ajita, Tissametteyya,

Puṇṇaka, then there’s Mettagū,
Dhotaka, Upasīva then
Nanda also Hemaka,

₁₁₃₁

The pair Todeyya, Kappa, then
Jātukaṇṇi the learned one,
Bhadrāvudha, Udaya, and
the brahmin who’s called Posāla,
Mogharāja the very wise
and Piṅgiya the seer so great—

₁₁₃₂

All these approached the perfect Seer,
the Buddha who practised perfectly,
to question him on subtle points,
to the Buddha-best they journeyed.

₁₁₃₃

Having been questioned the Buddha replied
with Dharma according to how it really is.
In answering their questions the Sage
delighted those brahmins.

₁₁₃₄

Being delighted by the Seer,
The Buddha, Kinsman of the Sun,

5.18 in praise of the way to the beyond

335

They lived the Holy Life in his presence,
He of such magniﬁcent wisdom.

₁₁₃₅

One who practices in accordance
With each and every question
As taught by the Buddha
Goes from the near to the far shore.

₁₁₃₆

One developing this unexcelled path
would go from the near to the far shore;
This path goes to the far shore, which is why
It’s called the “Way to the Far Shore”.

₁₁₃₇

5.19

Piṅgiya’s Song of the Way to the Beyond
Pārāyanānugītigāthā

piṅgiya

“Going to the Further Shore”, I’ll chant—
As He had Seen so did He teach,
that pure One of wisdom profound,
rid of desire and (interior) jungle—
falsehood—for what reason would he speak?

₁₁₃₈

Now therefore I shall eulogize
those words profoundly beautiful,
of One who has renounced the stains
of delusion, pride, hypocrisy.

₁₁₃₉

All-seer, Awake, Dispeller of dark,
beyond all being gone, gone to world’s end,
with no inﬂows left, let go of all dukkha-causes,
that one is “brahmin” rightly named: him do I serve. ₁₁₄₀
As bird that leaves behind a copse,
might then in fruit-ﬁlled forest live,
so have I left those of wisdom lean,
as swan to a great lake arrived.

₁₁₄₁

Those who explained to me before,
I heard the Buddha’s utterance,
said “thus it was”, “thus will be”—
all that was only oral lore,
all that promoted more disputes.

₁₁₄₂

Dispeller of darkness, seated alone,
the well-born, him the maker of Light,
Gotama, him profoundly wise,
Gotama, greatly intelligent—

₁₁₄₃

brahmin

piṅgiya

5.19 piṅgiya’s song of the way to the beyond

337

the Dharma to me he pointed out,
which can be seen right here and now,
by time, not limited at all,
craving’s exhaustion, troubles’ end,
with which naught can compare.

₁₁₄₄

How can you live apart from him,
Even for a minute, Piṅgiya?
Gotama of such profound wisdom,
Gotama of such profound sagacity.

₁₁₄₅

Who pointed out the Dhamma to you,
Apparent in this very life,
The ending of craving, free of distress,
With which naught can compare.

₁₁₄₆

I never live apart from him,
Even for a minute, brahmin
Gotama of such profound wisdom,
Gotama of such profound sagacity.

₁₁₄₇

Who pointed out the Dhamma to me,
Apparent in this very life,
The ending of craving, free of distress,
With which naught can compare.

₁₁₄₈

I see him with my mind’s eye, brahmin,
Being heedful night and day;
I spend the night revering him,
So I think I am never apart from him.

₁₁₄₉

The mind of faith and rapture, mindfulness,
from Gotama’s teachings never does depart,
for in whoever way the Deeply-Wise One goes,
to that very direction do I bow down.

₁₁₅₀

338

sutta nipāta
I am old, my strength is gone,
So my body cannot carry me there.
But my thoughts always travel there,
For my mind, brahmin, is devoted to him.

₁₁₅₁

Floundering in the mud, I lay,
Swimming from island to island,
Then I saw the Awakened Buddha,
Crossed over the ﬂood, free of inﬂows.

₁₁₅₂

buddha

Just as Vakkali was sure in faith,
Bhadrāvudha, and Āḷavigotama, too,
In the same way, you too should be sure of your faith,
₁₁₅₃
And, Piṅgiya, you will go to the far shore of death.

piṅgiya

Thus my inspiration grows even more,
Hearing the voice of the Sage;
The Buddha, who drew back the veil of the world,
Without heartlessness, of inspired speech,

₁₁₅₄

Knows what is beyond the gods,
Knows all, both high and low,
The Teacher who puts and end to questions
Of those who declare their doubts.

₁₁₅₅

The immovable, unshakeable,
That to which there is no compare:
For sure, I will go there,
I have no doubt of that.
You may remember me
As one who’s mind is made up.

₁₁₅₆

